Lamplighter
Monster Blood Tattoo 02

by

D. M. C o r n i s h

1
Master Come-Lately
Calendar(s) (noun) sometimes also called strigaturpis or just strig — a general term for any combative woman;
the Gotts call them mynchen — after the do-gooding heldin-women of old. Calendars gather themselves into
secretive societies called claves (its members known as clariards) — constituted almost entirely of women —
organized about ideals of social justice and philanthropy, particularly providing teratological protection for the needy
and the poor. They usually live in somewhat isolated strongholds — manorburghs and basterseighs — known as
calanseries. Some claves hide people — typically women — in trouble, protecting them in secluded fortlets known
as sequesteries. Other claves offer to teach young girls their graces and fitness of limb in places known as
mulierbriums. Calendars, however, are probably best known for the odd and eccentric clothing they don to advertise
themselves.

T

he short run of road that went east from Winstermill to Wellnigh House had a reputation
as the easiest watch on the Wormway — and for the most part it was. Known as the Pettiwiggin
or the Harrowmath Pike, it was so close to Winstermill, the mighty fortress of the lamplighters,
that those who used it were rarely troubled by nickers or bogles. Close and safe, the Pettiwiggin
was ideal for teaching young prentice-lighters the repetitious tasks of a lamplighter.
For nigh on two months the "lantern-sticks," as they were called by the scarred veterans who
taught and chastised them, had been at their training. In another two, if each boy made it through,
he would be promoted to lampsman. On that great day it would be his privilege to be billeted to
one of the many cothouses — the small fortresses punctuating the long leagues of the Wormway
— to begin his life as a lampsman proper.
At this middle point in their training the prentices were taken out on the road to begin the
lighting and the dousing of the great-lamps that lit the Wormway. Until now they had marched
and drilled, learned their letters and practiced at lighting on yard-lanterns safe within Winstermill.
Rossamünd had found it all as boring as he once feared a lamplighter's life might be. Indeed, his
first excursion out to light lamps had been uniformly laborious and uneventful, the overnight stay
in Wellnigh House uncomfortable, and the return to the manse dousing the lanterns the next
morning was as dull as the night before. He keenly regretted that he might never become a
vinegaroon as he had once hoped, and often thought to himself, Oh, that's not how they'd do it in
the navy; that's not what they'd do on a ram.
For Rossamünd the first half of prenticing had been long, yet not quite as lonely as his old life
at Madam Opera's Estimable Marine Society for Foundling Boys and Girls. Here at Winstermill
he shared the trials of training with the other prentices, all boys of a similar age from poor and
obscure origins like his. Together they fumbled through each movement of their fodicar drill;
together they winced at each reluctant, shoulder-wrenching shot of pistol or fusil; together they
balmed their feet after day-long marching. Yet the other lads were not nearly as keen on
pamphlets or the matter they contained — tales of the heroic progenitors of the Empire and the
monsters they slew. Most could barely read, despite the attempted remedies of "letters," the
reading and writing class under Seltzerman 1st Class Humbert. None of them showed any interest
in the vinegar seas or the Senior Service, nor desired a life of a vinegaroon. Grass-combers,
Master Fransitart, his old dormitory master, would have called them — true lubberly, groundhugging landsmen.
Rossamünd's failure to get to the manse in time for the start of prenticing meant he had
missed that first crucial period when fragile bonds of friendship begin. He had been late only one
week, but Lamplighter-Sergeant Grindrod had dubbed him "Master Come-lately," and the name
had stuck.
One skill he had learned at Madam Opera's proved exceptionally useful. The hours spent

keenly watching his old master and dispensurist Craumpalin had shown their fruit, for he was
known for his facility with potives and restoratives. He had been made the custodian of the
prentice-watch's chemistry, doling out repellents or healing draughts where necessary. This
earned him a little respect, but it meant that out on the road, while the others carried a shortbarreled musket known as a fusil, he was to content himself with his fodicar and a satchel of
potives. However, he had seen the effect of both musket ball and repellent. As reassuring as it
was to have a firelock in your hands that could cough and boom startlingly at an enemy, a wellaimed potive could deal with many more monsters at once and often more effectively.
The evening of this second prentice-watch, Rossamünd was called forward, joining the six
others he had been listed with when he first began as a prentice-lighter. These were the boys of
the 3rd Prentice-Watch, Q Hesiod Gæta. Though, by letter-fall order, Rossamünd's name should
have appeared second-from-the-top in the appropriate triple-marked ledgers (B for Bookchild), he
was nevertheless gathered with the six whose names were at the end of it, lads like Giddian
Pillow and Crofton Wheede. For a second afternoon these six and Rossamünd stood in single file
on the Forming Square as the other prentices looked on.
The platoon of prentices was sectioned into three quartos, one of which would go out on the
road each evening to light the lamps, staying in Wellnigh House over the night and returning to
Winstermill the next dawning, putting out the lights and getting back by midmorning. Each
quarto was named after a doughty lamplighter of old: Q protogenës, Q Io Harpsicarus and Q
Hesiod Gæta, Rossamünd's own.
With a cry of "A light to your path!" Lamplighter Sergeant Grindrod led the watch through
the great bronze gates of Winstermill down the steep eastern drive known as the Approach and
onto the Pettiwiggin. After them came the crusty Lampsmen 1st Class Assimus, Bellicos and
Puttinger, veteran lighters glaring and complaining under their breath, barely tolerating the green
incompetence of the prentices.
Much of the six-mile stretch of the highroad was raised on a dike of earth, lifting it almost a
yard above the Harrowmath — the great flat plain on which Winstermill was built — giving a
clear view over the high wild grasses. Ever the wayward lawn of the Harrowmath was mown by
fatigue parties of pioneers and local farm laborers with their glinting scythes, ever it would grow
back, thick and obscuring. At its eastern end, after five miles and eighteen lamps, the Pettiwiggin
descended flush with that land and passed through a small woodland, the Briarywood. Tall
sycamores and lithe wandlimbs grew on either side of the way, with shrubby evergreen myrtles
and knotted briars flourishing thickly about their roots. Yesternight, when the prentice-watch had
worked through it, Rossamünd had keenly felt the workings of mild threwd — that ghastly
sensation of hidden watchfulness and threat that thrilled all around. This evening it had grown a
little stronger as he went along, tiny prickles of terror upon his neck, and its subtleties felt like a
warning.
There was a great-lamp to light at the beginning of the Briary, one at its end and another right
in its midst. This middle light was found in a small clearing on the shoulder of the highroad.
After this only five lamps to go, Rossamünd consoled himself. Puffing at the stinging cold,
he stared suspiciously at the darkling woods about him. The thorny twine of branch and limb
crowded the broad verge, newly pruned by the day-watch fatigue party out gathering firewood.
Anything might by creeping behind these withy-walls, lurking in the dark beneath thin pale
trunks, hungry, waiting. Behind him the glow of the cold evening gloaming could be seen
through a grandly arched gap in the tall trees where the Pettiwiggin entered the woods. The sky
showed all about as pallid slits between the black of the lithesome trees. In the thin light
Rossamünd adjusted the strap of his salumanticum — the satchel holding the potives — and
checked once more that all within were in their place. He had been as eager as the other boys to
start at lighting proper, but now here, out in this wild unwalled place, he was not so sure. He
arched his back and looked up past the steep brim of his almost new, lustrous black thrice-high
through the overhanging branches at the wan measureless blue of evening. Without realizing it,

he gave a nervous sound, almost a sigh.
"Are we keeping you up, Master Come-lately?"
This was Lamplighter Sergeant Grindrod. Even when he hissed angrily, the lamplightersergeant seemed to be shouting. He was always shouting, even when he was supposed to be
talking with the habitual hush of the night-watch.
Rossamünd snapped back his attention. "No, Lamplighter-Sergeant, I just...!"
"Silence!"
Ducking his head to hide a frown, Rossamünd swallowed at an indignant lump and held his
tongue. Can't he feel the horrors growing?
From the first lamp of the afternoon until now, the prentice-watch had stopped at every
lamppost to wind out the light using the crank-hooks at the end of their blackened fodicars to
ratchet the winch within each lamp. Bundled as best they could be against the bitter, biting night,
they halted once again, stamping and huffing as Grindrod called Punthill Plod forward. The boy
pumped the winch a little awkwardly and wound out the phosphorescent bloom on its chain,
drawing it out into the glass bell of the seltzer-filled lamps, where it came alive with steadily
increasing effulgence. The prentices not working the lamp looked on while Lamplighter-Sergeant
Grindrod spelled out each rote-learned step.
The little thrills of threwd prickled all the more, and Rossamünd could no longer watch so
dutifully. Something was coming, something foul and intending harm — he could feel it in his
innards.
There it was: the clatter of horses' hooves, wild and loud. A carriage was approaching, and
fast.
"Off the road, boys! Off the road!" the lampsmen called in unison, herding the prenticelighters onto the verge with a push and a shove of their fodicars. Buffeted by the back or
shoulders of several larger boys, Rossamünd was shoved with them, almost falling in the
scramble.
"The wretched baskets! Who is fool enough to trot horses at this gloamin' hour?"
Lamplighter-Sergeant Grindrod snarled, mustachios bristling. "See if ye can eye the driver, lads
— we might have a writ to write back at Winstermill!"
From out of the dark ahead six screaming horses bolted toward them, carrying park-drag — a
private coach — with such bucking, rattling violence it was sure to break to bits even as it
shattered past the stunned lighters.
The prickle of threwd at Rossamünd's back became urgent.
"There's no coachman, Sergeant!" someone cried.
Rossamünd's internals gripped and a yelp of terror was strangled as it formed. A dark,
monstrous thing was rising from the rear of the park-drag. Massive horns curled back from its
crown; the slits of its eyes glowed wicked orange. Threwd exploded like pain up the back of
Rossamünd's head as the carriage shot by, the stench of the horn-ed thing upon it rushing up his
nostrils with the gust of their passing.
Some boys wailed.
"Frogs and toads!" Grindrod cursed. "The carriage is attacked!"
More horn-ed monsters could be seen, horrifyingly large, as the coach-and-six smashed on.
They clung to the sides of the carriage, worrying and wrestling with the passengers within. The
weight and fury of the beasts were so great the whole carriage tipped on to two wheels as it sped.
A yellow-green flare of potive burst from a window, flinging one vile nicker from the vehicle in a
high, hissing arc and leaving a fizzing trail of reeking fume that rained fur and flesh on the
prentices. Head aflame with false-fire, the monster crashed into the briars, a charred ruin. Even
as this one flew, another beast leaped from the park-drag to the back of the lead mare. As large as
the horse itself, the blighted creature bit into the mane and neck of the hapless, panicked nag. The
horse shrieked its dying whinny and fell beneath the grinding hooves of its fellows. The whole
vehicle careered and lurched as the team was brought down, sheer momentum tumbling the

carriage from the Wormway. With a sickening clash of shattering wood and grinding bones, it
skidded and smashed into a dense thicket of tall trunks on the farther side of the road.
For an agony of seconds there was a terrible stillness, the only sounds the mewling of a single
mortally injured horse and Grindrod's muttered encouragements to the prentices.
Rossamünd struggled to accept what he had just seen, he and his fellow lantern-sticks agog a
the barely lit suggestion of wreckage and mutilation barely fifty yards away among the trees.
"Ground crooks and present arms!" Lamplighter-Sergeant Grindrod gruffed, rousing the
prentice-lighters from their stunned dumbness. "Form two ranks for firing by quarto, prentices in
front, lampsmen at back! Master Come-lately, stand to our right with yer potives. Show yer flints
bravely, lads!"
Driving their fodicars into the roadside to make a hedge of steel, the prentice-watch formed
up in two lines behind these, facing the carriage wreck. With the coldly lambent light of the lamp
at their backs, the six other boys crouched at the front, the four men stood behind.
Putting himself to the side of this formation, Rossamünd gripped two scripts in a trembling
hand, a double dose ready for throwing. One was a cloth salpert of Frazzard's powder to stagger
and blind; the other a fragile porcelain caste of loomblaze, a fiery doom. He desperately wished
they had a leer with them to peer into the gathering dark and tell better where the monsters were.
Indistinctly lit at the edge of the great-lamp's nimbus glow, great horn-ed shadows stirred an
began to stalk about the partly smashed cabin of the coach.
"At least five of the baskets, and as big and cruel as ye never should hope to meet,"
Lampsman Bellicos hissed in awe.
"Aye," Grindrod growled, his voice all a-hush now. "I hain't seen naught like 'em before.
Have ye, Assimus?"
Lampsman Assimus grunted. "Where did they come from, I wonder?"
The lamplighter-sergeant's pale eyes glittered. We'll have to work some pretty steps tonight if
we're going to preserve the lads."
A murmur of dismay shuddered through the prentices.
Two or three of the huge, hunched shadows ripped and gnawed at the stricken horses. Others
clawed at the broken carriage, trying to get to the tasty morsels within who, obviously still alive,
could be heard crying out. Women's voices.
"That changes things! Other lives are in the balance now, and protecting 'em is our duty,"
Grindrod said firmly. "Ply your firelocks briskly, hit yer mark; a coward's mother never weeps
his end. Master Lately! Time for ye to produce the worst yer salt-bag has to offer. Ye must
defend us as we reload, boy! Prentices! Present and level on that blighted slip jack stumbling
there!"
One of the horn-ed nickers had appeared on the road. Its silhouette was clear against the
pallid glimpse of sky showing where the Pettiwiggin entered the wood.
"Ranks to fire together in volley!" With a rattle of unison action, prentice and lighter leveled
their fusils on this creature even as it became aware of them. At the muted metallic dicker of
many cocking flints, it fixed them with a gleaming, cunning gaze that seemed to say, You're
next...
Potives already in hand, Rossamünd adjusted his salumanticum so that it would not tangle a
good throw.
"Stay to the line!" Grintrod continued, low and grim. "Reload handsomely if ye want to live
— it may come to hand strokes soon enough, but I will see ye to yer billets safe tonight!"
Rossamünd's throat gripped at his swallowing: to come to hand strokes — to fight hand to
hand with a bogle — was to grapple with terror itself. Smaller, weaker-seeming bogles than these
could make pie-mince of a large man. He knew what hand strokes would mean: gashing and
iron-tasting terror. It was only a barely learned duty that kept him to his place.
Grindrod raised his arm, the prelude to the order to fire, yet before he could complete the
command a great churning disorientation tumbled over the prentice-watch.

Rossamünd reeled as the world turned right ways wrong and outside in.
The prentice-watch fumbled their weapons and some cursed in fright.
"They've got a wit in there..." managed Lampsman Bellicos through spasming, grinding teeth.
"And a bad one too..." Puttinger wheezed.
Rossamünd had spent some time with a fulgar on the way to Winstermill all those weeks ago,
and now here he was feeling the working of a wit. So this is what it is to suffer their frission...
The sensation quickly passed, leaving a sick headachy funk.
The nicker on the road was gone.
There was a smarting flash from the ruined coach — some kind of illuminating potive that
quickly became a glaring rose-colored flare lifted high by a small, slight figure. A woman was
struggling from the wreck, dazzling the scene with a brilliant ruby light that stung the eyes. The
monsters shied from that strange red glare, retreating into the darkness between tangled trunks.
"Ah! Bitterbright!" growled Lampsman Assimus, shielding his sight with an outstretched
arm. "That's a smart bit of skoldin'."
"Aye," Grindrod growled, "but wantonly witting and blinding us won't help us help them.
Make ready and keep a squint so ye can see into that blasted night."
Amazed, struggling to see what was happening, Rossamünd squinted, his eyes watering in the
quick, painful brilliance. Bitterbright was powerful chemistry that took great skill to keep
burning, and amid the confusion he was desperate to see its maker.
Bold again, the monsters paced a careful circle about the woman, some of them showing as
black shadows against the flare as they stalked between the calendars and the lamplighters, their
feral stink wafting over the prentice-watch. The smallest nicker was at least seven foot, as far as
Rossamünd could tell, the biggest maybe over nine. A-bristle with stiff fur, sharp and slender
horns curving back wickedly over their long skulls, they swayed menacingly as they bobbed and
lurched in complete and unnerving silence. Slowly the nickers arranged themselves with grim
deliberation.
Lamplighter-Sergeant Grindrod kept his eye fixed on the monsters. "Level on that nearest
brute. We'll see if we can't even odds a little."
No sooner had he said this than a slight figure sprang out from the carriage, a girl in strange
costume, long hair flailing as she leaped. An angry, frightened call followed her, something like
"Threnody, no! " The girl came on, dancing toward a monster, clutching at her temple. Once
more Rossamünd felt that weird and deeply unpleasant giddiness of frission contract in the middle
of his head then quickly flex in the pit of his stomach. His vision failed briefly this time and he
reeled, as did all those of the prentice-watch. Bellicos retched; Rossamünd's fellow prentice
Wrangle vomited and, finally overcome, three other boys collapsed.
Grindrod swore as he staggered. "Lackbrained wit! What's she playing at?"
"They're stinkin' calendars!" Rossamünd heard Assimus' angry whisper.
Rossamünd had read of such as these. They were a society of women — lahzars, skolds,
pistoleers and the rest — set to doing good, protecting the weak and pursuing other noble causes.
The agony rapidly passed, as it had before, leaving its aching in Rossamünd's skull. Yet he
kept enough of his senses to see that though his fellow lighters were reeling, the monsters were
not suffering much at all. The striving of the long-haired calendar had done little to deter the
nickers. She was not practiced enough at her witting — it was random, inept. And now the
monsters pounced, the largest blocking Rossamünd's view of her in its ravenous intent.
Again they felt the wit's wild frission, driving every one of the prentice-watch still standing to
his knees. One of the nickers fell too. With a weird shriek, two more oddly dressed figures
pounced from the shattered wood and frame while a third, bearing the bitterbright, struggled after.
By the swaying rose light the two dashed to the young wit's defense, prancing and whirling,
dancing about her as they began a mortal struggle with the horn-ed nickers, their hands trailing
long, lacerating wires. The monsters shied and cast about wildly, raging with disturbing strangled
yips as the figures harried and slit first at one then another, keeping them at bay, pirouetting clear

of every swipe.
One of the dancers misstepped, and that was her end as the horn-ed nicker gripped and ripped
and clawed her — an end more terrible yet than Licurius' at the carving nails of the grinnlings.
Bile bubbled up from his gullet as Rossamünd tried to conceive how a living person could so
quickly be bent and rent to a meaningless mash. Not even the stoutest proofing could stop such
elemental strength. Even as this woman was slain the other dancer became frantic and, with a
grieving wail, danced madly about the killer of her sister, cutting at it over and over, slicing off
one of its horns, severing a mangled arm, removing an ear. Another beast sprang from a thicket,
snatched the flailing woman about her stomach and chewed its great fangs into her face. With a
flash-and-bang that echoed through the spindly, spiny wood, someone still inside the cabin fired a
pistola — a salinumbus by the flat, heavy slap of the discharge. Hit low with the shot, this
ambuscading nicker tottered, dropping its maimed prey. Another thick pistol-crack and a glare of
orange flickered about the head of the beast, followed quickly by boisterous crackling. Its head
afire, the creature collapsed back with a strange, husky howling, tripping over its victims and
falling to the earth. The glare of its burning added light to the furor.
As these things were happening, several nickers had closed with the long-haired wit, who
cowered and sent out ineffectual flutterings of her witting powers. Even from where he stood,
Rossamünd could feel threwd emanating from these monsters as the beasts sought to best their
prey through anguish and mad terror alone.
His fellow prentices whimpered.
"Pernicious threwd!" cursed Assimus.
"Take your aim on that leftmost basket!" Grindrod cried.
The prentice-watch brought up their firelocks.
"Fire!"
With a sharp, rattling clatter the quarto fired, startling the horn-ed nickers, gun-smoke
obscuring their view.
One of the monsters collapsed under many hits of musket ball and crumpled gasping to the
verge. Sets of glimmering monster eyes — maybe four, maybe five — regarded the lighters
malignantly.
"Reload! Reload!" Grindrod demanded, and the prentices hurried to comply.
The long-haired calendar sank to her knees.
The monsters looked to her again and closed for the slaying.
Yet the smallest calendar staggered in between. It was she who had set the bitterbright to
burning and kept it bright for her sisters to see. She flung the glare at an encroaching nicker, the
red glimmer dimming rapidly now that she no longer fed its chemistry. The beast recoiled as the
potive struck and a smolder set in its fur, quickly turning to ruby flames that engulfed head and
shoulders. Regardless, two others approached slavering noiselessly, tongues lolling and licking at
the smell of blood and smoke.
By the light of the failing bitterbright Rossamünd could see that this brave woman wore the
conical hat of a skold and white spoor lines down both sides of her face. A thick hackle of creamcolored fur wrapped about her neck and shoulders, and strange little wings protruded from her
back. She looked fragile, vulnerable, doomed.
One set of glowing eyes, however, had stayed fixed on the prentices hurrying new rounds into
their fusils. This nicker chose them as its next victims and pounced, taking five yards with each
springing lope.
"By quarto!" Grindrod hollered.
The lantern-sticks struggled to get their weapons up in time as in five strides the beast was
halfway toward them, foul breath steaming from its gnashing teeth.
Rossamünd lifted his arm ready to throw his chemistry.
"Level!"
The horn-ed terror arched itself as it ran at them, ready to pounce. Almost in unison the other

nickers lashed the calendars... and froze as if each was stricken. The monster rushing them
toppled and skidded along the road in midstride.
"What the...!" Grindrod exclaimed.
"Saved," whimpered Crofton Wheede.
"She's a bane!" marveled Assimus. Both skold and with, banes were rare and extraordinary.
Indeed, the calendar, though clearly struggling, was now touching her left temple, a gesture
characteristic of a wit. The prentice-watch looked on in awe as, with a precise show of
frightening potency, the woman caused the largest beast before her to writhe in paroxysms of
agony while holding the other two frozen. So skilled was she that, unlike her long-haired
compatriot, she sent no wild washings of frission to trouble the lampsmen and their charges. All
Rossamünd could feel was a vague fluttering in his innards.
With a hoarse sound almost like a whinny, the monster bent on the lamplighters struggled to
break free of the calendar's invisible grip. It stumbled sideways, tried to turn and lunge at the
quarto of the prentice-watch, their weapons still leveled and ready.
"Fire!" Grindrod hollered, and the prentice-watch let go a clattering volley at the beast. It
gave voice to a disturbing, sheeplike bleat and ceased its struggling.
Still the calendar bane held the other two beasts in a prison unseen while a pistoleer pulled
herself from the ruin of the transport. She drew forth two long-barreled pistolas and fired both
point-blank into the glimmering, helpless eyes of one of the pinioned creatures. With a violent
jerk and gouts of black pouring from its head, the beast expired.
All that remained was the largest monster. A tortured thing it was now, twisting and
thrashing upon the ground, a captive of its own agony. The woman never moved, never touched
it, a hand always at her temple. Slowly the creature's movements slackened; slowly its writhings
turned to twitchings and finally to nothing. Its terrifying orange eyes faded and at last were
extinguished.
With an audible and weary exhalation, the calendar bane sagged to the ground.
Rossamünd let out a quiet relieved sigh of his own.
"Ye've done it, lads!" Grindrod exclaimed, proud and a little amazed. "Ye've just won
through yer first theroscade."
It's not my first, Rossamünd thought but kept to himself.
"There'll be punctings for ye all after this tonight," the lamplighter-sergeant continued.
"It's been a prodigious long time since a prentice was marked," Bellicos chipped in.
The prentices grinned at each other weakly, happy simply to be alive.
I don't want to be puncted! Rossamünd fretted.
Grindrod turned to him. "Ye're carrying the salt bag, Master Lately. Ye can come with me,"
he declared.
Leaving the lampsmen to organize the prentices into piquets, the lamplighter-sergeant stalked
over to the wreck of the park-drag. The calendar bane and pistoleer were bent over one of their
fallen while the long-haired wit sat slumped in the twigs and dirt by the bristled corpse of a dead
nicker.
"The sniveling snot — almost ruined us all with her wanton wit's pranks," Grindrod cursed
under his breath, then called as they approached, "Hoi, calendars! Bravely fought and well won,
m'ladies! Lamplighter-Sergeant Grindrod and a prentice come to offer what aid we might."
Crouched by the body of her comrade whose face was a gory mess, the bane looked up at
him. Her cheeks and brow glistened with a lustrous patina of sweat; her eyes were sunken and
her skin was flushed. Rossamünd thought she looked more ill than injured. "We may have
triumphed in the fight, but the loss of two sisters is never well," she returned in a soft voice, with
a hint of a musical southern accent. "Lady Dolours you may call me, Lamplighter-Sergeant; bane
and laude to the Lady Vey, esteemed august of the Right of the Pacific Dove. Your assistance is
welcome. My sister languishes with these terrible bites to her face but will survive if attended to
quickly. I would tend her myself, but I lack the right scripts. Do you carry staunches?

Vigorants?" All this time she had not stood, and the effort of speaking left her breathless.
Keen to please, Rossamünd nodded eagerly. "Lamplighter-Sergeant, I have what she
requires," he said emphatically as he fossicked about in the potive satchel. "Thrombis and a jar of
bellpomash." The first would stop a wound's flowing and the second revive spirits when taken in
food or drink.
"As it should be, prentice." Grindrod nodded curt approval. "Ye may give them what they
need."
Rossamünd held the jars of potives as the pistoleer ministered to the gruesome injuries on her
sister's face. He forced himself to keep watching, to not flinch and wince and look away from the
gore: he was no use to anyone if he let others' wounds trouble him. With a fright he saw a flash
on the edge of his sight, and was startled by a crack! as Bellicos put his fusil to the head of a
prostrate nicker and brought its twitching throes to an end.
"I must ask ye, lady maiden-fraught, what possessed ye to be traveling in the eve of a day
with a six-horse team?" Grindrod folded his arms. "Ye ought to know it only encourages the
bogles!"
The diminutive calendar called Dolours looked the lamplighter-sergeant up and down as if her
were a blockheaded simpleton. "That I do," she returned wearily, "as does even the least
schooled. The horses were proofed in shabraques, sir, and doused with the best nullodours we
possess; and had we been allowed a night's succor by your less-than-cheerful brothers at
Wellnigh, we would not have needed to venture forth so foolishly in the unkind hours." She held
the sergeant-lighter's stare. "But we were refused lodging at that cot, directly and to our faces.
No room for a six-horse team, or so they said."
"That can't be right." Grindrod scowled. "Of course six horses can stable in Wellnigh —
wouldn't be much use if they couldn't! What other reason did they give?"
"No other reason at all, Lamplighter-Sergeant," the bane said coolly. "After this exchange the
charming Major-of-House himself simply refused entry and sent us on our way. Little less than
storming the twin keeps would have got us within."
"Bah!" Grindrod almost spat. "Another of the Master-of-Clerks' spat-licking toadies," he
muttered. Aloud he said, "He's one of the new lot shifted up from the Considine. If what ye say
be true, I'll be having words with the Lamplighter-Marshal — refusing folks bain't the way we
conduct ourselves out her on the Emperor's Highroad. Succor to all and a light to their path," he
concluded, with one of the maxims with which the prentices had been indoctrinated from the very
first day of prenticing.
"A light to your path," intoned the prentices automatically, as they had been taught.
"Indeed, Lamplighter-Sergeant," Dolours returned, "the Emperor's lampsmen seem not to be
what they once were."
Gindrod bridled.
Rossamünd too felt a twinge of loyal offense. The lampsmen he had come to know worked
hard to keep the roads lit and well tended.
"Attacks rise and numbers dwindle, madam," the lamplighter-sergeant countered, chin lifted
in defensive pride, "yet the road has the same figure of lamps and still we have to compass it all.
So I ask again: what be yer business on the road?"
The calendar stayed her ground. "As I understand it," she said slowly, "time is running short
for your prentices to be sufficiently learned in their trade, true?"
"Aye, precious short. What of that?"
"It's a simple thing, you see," Dolours said, ever so quietly. She looked to the long-haired
calendar — Threnody, they had called her — who glared at both the lamplighter-sergeant and
Rossamünd. "This young lady desires to become a lamplighter."

2
Wings of A Dove
Fodicar(s) (noun) also lantern-crook, lamp- or lantern-switch, poke-pole or just poke; the instrument of the
lamplighter, a long iron pole with a perpendicular crank-hook protruding from one end, used to activate the seltzer
lamps that illuminate many of the Empire's important roads. The pike-head allows the fodicar to be employed as a
weapon — a kind of halberd — to fend off man and monster alike.

F

rom the little Rossamünd know of these things, lamplighters rarely, if ever, employed
women as lampsmen. As servants, as cothouse clerks, or even as soldiers maybe, but never a
lighter.
Lamplighter-Sergeant Grindrod puffed his cheeks, his jaw jutting stubbornly. "Her?" Then
he laughed — a loud, foolish noise in the mourning-quiet after the attack. "She near brought us
all to ruin. She'll be lucky I don't clap her in the pillory for impeding the goodly duties of His
Rightful Emperor's servants!"
Threnody stood, clench-fisted. "I am a peer, you lowborn toadlet, of rank so far above yours,
you'll be lucky I don't claim quo gratia and have you clapped in irons yourself, you sot-headed
dotard!"
Rossamünd tried to pull his neck into his stock as a turtle might.
His fellow lighters gathered near, awestruck.
The lamplighter-sergeant was agog. "Lowborn? Sot-headed? Quo gratia?" Grindrod's red
face became an apoplectic purple. "I'm not the want-wit who frissioned my watch to a daze in the
middle of a bogle attack! They wasted the surgeon's fees on ye, poppet!"
Threnody let out a tight, wordless yell, both her hands clutching her temple.
Rossamünd's head, his entire gall, revolted, and his sense of up and down collided. He
staggered and fell, joining Grindrod, the lampsmen, the prentices and even the pistoleer writhing
in the dirt.
"Enough!" cried Dolours, and the wayward frission ceased. The bane was the only one
standing, her left hand to her temple, her right stretched over the now prone Threnody. She had
witted the girl, striven one of her own. "Enough," she whispered again. Looking deeply unwell,
she reached a conciliatory had to Grindrod regardless, an offer of help.
"I can get to me feet meself, madam," he seethed, tottering dazedly as he proved his words.
As Rossamünd and his fellows unsteadily regained their feet, Dolours sighed. "That 'poppet,'
Sergeant, is the daughter of our august and a marchioness-in-waiting in her own right: you'd do
well to pay your due respect."
Lampsmen Bellicos, Puttinger and Assimus muttered grimly.
The prentice-lighters looked to their sergeant.
"And a great liability she'd be to ye too, I am sure." Grindrod smiled. He nodded a bow,
saying louder, "I apologize to ye." He wrestled with himself a moment, then with deliberate,
frosty calm, added, "I don't know where such a custard-headed notion sprang from, madam, but
women bain't wanted in the lighters!"
"We know it well, Lamplighter-Sergeant!" The calendar bane stood unsteadily and
Rossamünd saw her face turn a ghastly gray. Clearly she suffered from some feverish malady.
She smiled sadly. "Perhaps you are right, but yet it is not an impossible thing for a woman to take
her place in your quartos, I am sure?"
Grindrod's mustachios bristled and writhed as he considered her words. "Bain't really for me
to say one way or t'other, bane," he said finally. "This shall have to be the decision of the
Lamplighter-Marshal."

"Hence our journey to Winstermill, Lamplighter-Sergeant," Dolours countered.
"Well, our work tonight takes us in the contrary direction." Grindrod rocked back on his
heels, his arms still folded across his broad chest. "However, I'll send back a transport with guard
to gather the fallen and bring ye all back to Wellnigh. Now ye're six horses less they'll be having
to give ye a billet, I reckon." With that, the lamplighter-sergeant pivoted on his brightly polished
heel and stepped out on to the road, calling the prentices and lampsmen to him.
Sick with too much frission, Rossamünd came tumbling after, trying hard not to trip over the
putrid bodies of the dead bogles. The lamplighter-sergeant made hasty arrangements: he and
Bellicos and the other prentices would continue on to Wellnigh House, the sturdy little cottagefortress to the east, continuing to light the remaining lanterns as they went. Rossamünd, however,
as possessor of the salumanticum, was to be left behind to tend the calendars' wounds. With him
would remain Lampsmen Assimus and Puttinger as a nominal guard and fatigue party to help
with the fallen and to salvage the baggage.
With a cry of "Prentice-watch in single file, by the left, march!" Lamplighter-Sergeant
Grindrod, Lampsman 1st Class Bellicos and the wide-eyed, nervous prentices went on, leaving
Rossamünd and the other two lampsmen with the vigilant, silent calendars.
Assimus and Puttinger ignored Rossamünd. Lampsmen rarely shared in chitter-chatter with
prentices till they were full lampsmen themselves. Reluctantly they set to work finding
belongings and goods amid the shatters and splinters, making a pile of the broken trunks and halfrent valises. Typical of the older men who worked on this easy stretch of road, they were
crotchety half-pay pokers whose job was to babysit the lantern-sticks out on the road as they
learned their trade. They paid no attention whatsoever to the lads unless duty demanded.
Feeling uncomfortable and unnecessary, Rossamünd hugged his arms against the searching
chill.
Balding branches rubbed together with whispering creaks. Dry twigs rattled.
Exposed and neglected, Rossamünd looked to the calendars. Head bowed and shy, the young
prentice fished about his salumanticum and brought out more bellpomash, offering it to Dolours
with a nervous cough, "I thought you might need this, m'lady. I'm sorry, I have nothing more
appropriate for a fever — no febrifuges or soothing steams..."
She remained silent for a breath, looking to Rossamünd's hands, then to his face. There was
an unreal calmness in her gaze. Her spoors, those white lines that went vertically from her
hairline across both eyes to her jaw, showed clearly in the night. They made her look serious,
dangerous. Like Europe, she possessed a remote, almost casual deadliness.
Rossamünd began to regret his boldness.
"Thank you, young lampsman." The bane nodded graciously. "It was foolish of me to have
left both ill and without the chemistry for even a single vigorant. Dispense away."
Putting down his fodicar, Rossamünd set about his task, also giving out lordia — to restore
their humours, which, as he had read in a book from Winstermill's small library, was essential
after times of great stress and exertion. He had bought this from a hedgeman, a wandering scriptgrinder who had visited Winstermill not more than a month ago.
Each restorative was gratefully received.
Such a concentrated collection of teratologists Rossamünd had never seen before. While he
dispensed, he sneaked beady, fascinated looks at their odd costumes. The calendars hid their
well-proofed silken bossocks beneath mantles patterned in blue, orange and white. Dolours kept
warm beneath a hackle of fur. She wore fleece-lined, buff-covered oversleeves called manchins
tied to her shoulders with ribbons. Rossamünd could not help staring at her wings. Although
they looked real — outstretched and ready to fly — he knew they were simply ornaments.
Each of the calendars' feet was shod with quiet-shoes: flat-heeled, soft-soled, coming to a
pronounced, flattened point at the toe. The strange, ornate hats upon the calendars' heads —
known as dandicombs — varied, however. The pistoleer — whose name, he quickly learned, was
Charllette — wore a thrice-high; the maimed dancer had been wearing a tight, vertical bundle of

black ribbon and many, many hair tines — these were being removed even as Rossamünd
watched. Threnody, evidently sulking, wore her own hair, with no hat or other flamboyant head
covering. She, too, had a spoor: a thin arrow pointing up from her left brow — the mark of a wit.
Rossamünd had read that wits were always bald; he wondered how it was that this one was not.
With sad, taciturn direction from Dolours, the lampsmen discovered the body of a sixth
calendar in the mess of the carriage. The lampsmen placed it on the side of the road, near the
lamp and away from the corpses of bogles. Beside it they laid the fallen dancer, covering both in
their patterned mantles and returning to their vitriolic mutterings and the search for luggage. If
there was one thing Rossamünd had learned well, it was that lamplighters liked to gripe.
The three calendars stood by the bodies, their heads bowed.
The lampsmen stopped their labors and watched, staying very much apart from the women as
they grieved. Thinking it polite, Rossamünd removed himself too, sitting on the side of the road.
Sad in sympathy, he thought he could hear Threnody softy weeping as Dolours whispered almost
inaudibly, "Fare thee well, kind Pannette. Rest thee easy, dear Idesloe. The dove fold you in her
down-ed wings..." More was said, special funeral potives lit to ward off scavenging bogles and
hushed laments sung while the lampsmen stared. The sad task over, the calendars retired to the
edges of the lamplight.
Ritual done, the lampsmen recovered the last of the dunnage. "They expect her to join us!"
Assimus piped up as he and Puttinger wrestled a trunk to the small collection of the calendars'
belongings. "They expect us to let a girl join! Have you ever, ever heard of such a thing, Putt? I
don't give a fig what the Marshal might do: I've never heard of such a thing in all my time!"
Threnody, obviously overhearing, fixed them with an attempt at a withering eye.
Rossamünd was caught by it, and though they were not his words, he blushed and shuffled
awkward feet.
"You there," Threnody called, soft yet sour, "the little ledgermain. I am in need of evander, if
you have this."
Rossamünd hesitated. Evander he did not have — only gromwell, a cheap substitute courtesy
of the miserliness of the clerks — though it did in a pinch. He said as much, and the young
calendar snorted in mild disgust.
It will do, she said, and held out a hand to receive the restorative.
He stepped over and gave to her a drab brown flasket marked with a Gr to signify gromwell.
Threnody took it, looked at it with a splenic expression, and then quaffed it in one brash gulp.
"That is all" was all she said as thanks, and with that said ignored him completely.
Rossamünd was not impressed. She could not have been more than a year or two his senior.
"I reckon she's taken a liking to ye, Master Come-lately," Assimus chuckled archly.
Rossamünd turned his attention to nothing in particular and fixed it there. This kind of jesting
was, he had learned over the last two months, part of the lamplighter way.
"Not that you really want to get tangled with a calendar, boyo," Assimus continued quietly,
unexpectedly willing to share his manifold experiences. "They're always getting in our road on
the road, if ye get me, always interfering with their lofty machinations. Still," he said, patting the
young prentice on the back, "since they've taken such a shine on ye, it seems it's fallen to thee to
be their minder. Handsomely done, lad, a noble thing you've set to, sparing us the burden.
Handsomely done!"
"But I thought it was the duty of all lamplighters to do the noble thing," Rossamünd returned
seriously.
Assimus looked awkward in turn, then collected himself. "What do ye know of noble things,
lantern-stick?" the lighter said churlishly. "What dangers have ye had to test yer thew? See what
I've seen and then see if ye're so quick to judgment. Just keep to yer watching, and yer ignorant
twitterings to yeself!"
Feeling chastened and foolish, Rossamünd did as he was told.

The cloudless night grew colder. The women whispered to each other in a foreign tongue, yet
said little to their three guardians. The calendar pistoleer attended to the hurts of her half-chewed
and mercifully unconscious sister while Threnody brooded and Dolours sat suffering her fever.
Heavy pistolas hanging ready at her hips, Charllette picked slowly through the fallen nickers,
frequently looking out into the darkling woods wanly lit by a rising moon. As she went from
corpse to corpse, the pistoleer would crouch for a time, poking at the beast, then rise and move to
the next, slyly stowing things in her stout satchel each time. Puzzled, Rossamünd watched her
from the corner of his gaze, trying not to look open and curious. At one of the dead monsters he
saw her stopper an odd-shaped vial, one he recognized — a bruicle it was called — used by
physicians and surgeons to hold humours and by teratologists to hold... monster blood!
He was curious to see the manner by which it was done — his peregrinate, the waterproof
almanac given him by Fransitart — was only vague on the subject. The epitome of failed
nonchalance, the young prentice sauntered over to a beast and stared at it, looking for signs of
Charllette's gruesome work. The horn-ed nicker's eyes were wide and staring, as vacantly black
and blank and empty of energy as they had been wild, coal-fire orange when it lived. Rossamünd
looked into them sadly. Such an impressive, stalwart foe, never friend. And oh, the stink of it!
Like a piggery, the jakes and an unmucked manger in one.
"These are ugly, festering articles." The hushed voice of Lampsman Assimus marveling to
his right startled Rossamünd. "Look'ee here!" The lampsman poked at the heavy body with his
fodicar. "This one we hit — see the holes. Every bullet has its billet. I see those saucy coneys
have taken their fill already, but we have claim on this 'un's ichor too. Draw some, Putt — we can
get Drawk to punct us when we're off watch tomorrow."
Puttinger shook his head grimly as he drew forth a wicked-looking utensil.
A sprither, Rossamünd realized. It was a tube of steel bent into an S-shape with a needle
point on one end and a short, flexible straw made out of gut protruding from the other.
"They'll claim the kill, no doubting," Puttinger said in his thick Gott accent as he bent and
stabbed the point of the sprither into a hole made by a musket ball. "But we had our hands in it!"
He sucked on the straw briefly and squeezed it several times till the thick, dark brown blood —
the ichor — of the bogle trickled out. Pinching the straw to stem the flow, he unstoppered a
bruicle of his own and let the ichor drain into it. From what Rossamünd understood, now that the
ichor was contained outside the body, it was called cruor — spilled blood.
Rossamünd watched with rapt disgust. Then his own blood went cold. They shant mark me!
To be puncted with a cruorpunxis was foul to the young prentice ever since he had witnessed the
end of the innocent Misbegotten Schrewd by Europe's hand. Not that he would ever express this
aversion: an admission of such a thing would surely brand him a sedorner. With the
lamplighters, as in the cities, monster-lovers were always hanged. More than once Rossamünd
had seen a man hanged in Right Tree Angle, the square in what was once his part of Boschenberg.
He had never relished the spectacle as many others appeared to do, with their jostling and jeering
and hoots of derision. "Traitor! Traitor! Who's going to caress the nickers now?" Such were the
cries as the poor convict's face went purple-black and his tongue swelled out.
Rossamünd shuddered at the vivid recollection.
"No blood-marking for thee, little lantern-stick," Puttinger said gravely, as if her were reading
Rossamünd's thoughts. "Though thy chums did, thee did not have thy hand in this killing."
Rossamünd quickly returned to the present. "Aye, Lampsman." Oh yes, he was very glad to
be excluded from the kill — even if these nickers were not so innocent.
Assimus stepped away and cautiously kicked at what was left of a horse. He looked over to
the calendars with a snort. "Horses indeed! Much smarter choice, oxen, for traveling in the
night," he said to his fellow lighters, just loud enough for the calendars to hear. Only Threnody
paid him any mind — an ineffectual glare. "Not nearly as toothsome and attracting to the nickers
as a team of half-a-dozen glossy nags." He scratched his head. "Thing is, Putt, how is it so many
of the hugger-muggers have found themselves this far west?"

Puttinger nodded gravely. "Our brothers is pushed too hard out east and are letting the
Schmuttlingers through. It is like the people is saying: the Marshal is struggling."
"The Lamplighter-Marshal will have it in hand, and no fear," said Assimus. "We just do as he
directs and we'll win through. It's just like that dark time back in — when was it? Ye remember,
Putt? When all those nasty spindly things came out from the Gluepot and with them schrewds in
hordes and we went out to help... It was 'cause of the Marshal we got 'em then, and we still have
'im now and we'll get 'em now — easy as kiss me hand!"
"Yes." Puttinger did not sound convinced. He stowed the sprither and stepped away, looking
suspiciously into the menacing shadows.
Rossamünd had read of nickers and bogles — "hugger-muggers" Assimus had called them —
gathering in numbers in determined assault on some remote or ailing community. In days-nowgone maraudes of monsters would ravage everyman heartlands, even into the parishes and right
up to the walls of a city. Such terrors were so rare now as to be mythical, yet it was still the
greatest fear of the subjects of the Empire. Within every bosom dwelt the vague dread of cities
overrun with murderous, civilization-ending bogles, of gashing pain and effusions of blood, of a
world without humankind. Without vigilance, ancient history could too easily become present
calamity. It was this dread that made imperial citizens so determinedly vengeful whenever a
sedorner was ferreted out from among them.
Yet here on the edge of the Idlewild, even Rossamünd had heard the growing rumors of
monsters setting on people in the lands about with alarming regularity; read of it in the few
periodical pamphlets he had managed to buy from the paper hawkers who drifted through the
fortress. At first he had thought it was just a part of rural life, but if weary veterans of the sinew
of Lampsmen Assimus and Puttinger were troubled, then Rossamünd was moved to be doubly so.
He was surely glad to be in the company of a bane, even a weary one.
In the carriage debris a part-crushed hamper had been rescued. By the light of the great-lamp,
as the calendars and the lamplighters reluctantly gathered close for safety, Charllette rummaged
among the cracked, dribbling pots ands smashed, smeared parcels, sharing any unspoiled vittles
she found. The pistoleer called Rossamünd's portion "a nice bit of coty gaute." He examined it
skeptically: it looked like pie filled with odd-smelling chunks.
"It's quail pasty, lamp boy," Threnody said testily. "Just eat it."
Rossamünd did so, even though it was congealed-cold, it tasted rather good.
In the encroaching dusk, green Maudlin rose over the eastern hills and showed how long the
night had been. In due time the lamplighter-sergeant returned with a guard of four sturdy
haubardiers of the Wellnigh House watch leading a dray pulled by a nervous ox. The animal was
draped in a flanchardt, a covering blanket of proofed Hessian. It was turned about and took the
exhausted, injured or unconscious calendars, their two dead sisters, and their damaged effects
back to Wellnigh House. It was agreed better to return to the cothouse rather than go on to
Winstermill; better to get indoors as soon as possible while the night still lingered, and with it the
threat of more monsters. The proper treatment of wounds would have to wait until tomorrow.
"Amble ye by the dray, Master Come-lately," Grindrod commanded. "Keep yerself available
to tend their hurts."
So Rossamünd walked, as did Assimus and Puttinger and the haubardiers, staying by the ox
dray, ready if a script was needed. On the farther side of the woodland Rossamünd saw the
crumpled bodies of the park-drag driver and his side-armsman. They had been mauled then
tossed from the stampeding vehicle to land dead on the side of the highroad. Wrapped in canvas
tarpaulins, they were laid on the dray alongside the remains of the two calendars.
The round hills of the Tumblesloe Heap loomed black against he starlit gray. The lanterns
became more frequent: at last the cothouse was near. What swelling relief it was to finally spy
the beacon flares and window-lights of the small twin keeps of Wellnigh House at the base of the
hills. A pair of squat towers stood on either side of the Pettiwiggin, each fenced by a thick
drystone wall. These were connected by a hanging gallery known as the Omphalon, a bridge with

walls of solid wood and a steep-sloping roof that spanned the road. In this raised gallery were the
lighters' quarters, and the sight of lanterns winking from its narrow windows set Rossamünd's
thoughts to bed and sleep.
At last they entered the walled lane between the two keeps. Here they passed ornate warding
censers, great brass domes that squatted in heavy three-legged stands on either side of the road.
Within these domes, day and night, nicker repellents were burned, their poison fumes seeping
through holes bored in the dull metal. On Rossamünd's very first night at Wellnigh House he had
sucked a lungful of their foul fetor and for an instant thought his end had come, but the wind had
mercifully blown another way and he recovered. From that day he learned to stay upwind of the
censers or hold his breath and shut his eyes till he had passed.
What a relief it was to pass through the thick oak gates in the broad wall of the northern
fastness and stand safe within the cothouse's tiny foreyard. The unhappy deeds that had ruined
the night were already common talk there, yet still the calendars received a barely civil reception.
The long-faced Major-of-House was waiting for them in the yard and insisted on a brief
conference with Grindrod while Rossamünd was made to remain in the cold. The lamplightersergeant looked mightily unimpressed with what he was hearing. Dolours approached them as
they remonstrated under the light of a yard-lamp and the discussion came to an abrupt and
obviously unsatisfactory end. The house-major raised a refusing hand, loudly declaring, "That is
all, madam! I had my reasons. Take the matter up with our Marshal in Winstermill if you want
further hearing." He dismissed Grindrod and called for Rossamünd with an authoritative wave.
The young prentice hurried over dutifully while, with stony face, Dolours turned wearily on
her heel and returned to her sisters-in-arms.
"I'm told these blighted women have taken a liking to you, boy," the house-major said
quickly, not stopping for the inconvenience of an answer, "so you can be their liaison.
Meddlesome wenches — you may not find them so agreeable once you've spent time in their
company. Take them now to the store on the farther side of the Omphalon. They may rest their
troublesome heads there."
Rossamünd groaned inwardly. He led the women through the windowless watch room on the
ground floor of the north tower, pointing the way down narrow passages of dark wood and
through the cramped rooms of a structure built for efficient military function rather than genteel
comfort. Up the tight stairway to the gallery he took them, and over, along the access way of the
raised gallery and by the night sounds of the already sleeping prentices, to their room beyond in
the southern keep. He became aware that a hushed, earnest talk between Threnody and the bane
Dolours — begun in the front watch room — had now become a repressed yet passionate
struggle. As he stood at the top of the southern stairs to point the way down, he heard Threnody
exclaim through clenched teeth with petulant words too low and hissing to distinguish.
Arriving at their hastily arranged quarters, the calendars testily reviewed the inadequate
lodging. Crates and goods had been rearranged and foldable cots squeezed between, all still dusty
and crawling with earwigs.
Embarrassed, Rossamünd bid them a fair night with a stiff bow.
Despite their weariness, Dolours and the pistoleer returned the compliment, the bane saying,
"Grace and manners. We are obliged to you, young lighter. You have been a great service to us."
Threnody just frowned and, with a huff of spleen, lay on her ill-made cot.
His thoughts all for bed, Rossamünd went to his own lodgings, shuffling among the sleeping
prentices, and threw himself down clothes, boots and all.

3
On Returning To Winstermill
Cothouse(s) (noun) type of fortalice; the small, often houselike, fortresses built along highroads to provide billet
and protection to lamplighters and their auxiliaries. Cothouses are usually built no more than ten to twelve miles
apart, so that the lamplighters will not be left lighting lamps and exposed in the unfriendly night for too long. Their
size goes from a simple high-house with slit windows well of the ground, through the standard structure of a main
house with small attendant buildings all surrounded by a wall, to the fortified bastion-houses like Haltmire on the
Conduit Vermis or Tungoom on the Conduit Felix.

R

ossamünd woke, having slept little, to the drum roll of "Stand While You Can," a
merry martial tune rattled out every morning at five-o'-the-clock to rouse the lantern-watch.

Stand while you can, lads,
Stand while you can:
For the Glory of Ol' Barny,
Stand while you can.
He gave a gentle groan. The common-quarter night at Wellnigh had been full of snores and
night shouts and a paucity of proper rest. He should have been used to this: it was how he had
spent all his sleeps at Madam Opera's. Two months' prenticing at Winstermill, however, with a
cell of his own, had given him something he had never truly known, privacy. Cold and small
though his might have bee, with a cot lumpy like tepid slogg-porridge, he had come to prize its
seclusion.
Rousing himself, Rossamünd rubbed grit-itchy eyes and sat, his head still swimming with
nightmares of gnashing shadows and carriages attacked. Fouracres, the ambling Imperial
postman he had met on his journey to Winstermill, had told him a lamplighter's life was
dangerous, and now the prentice well understood why.
A life of adventure. A life of violence.
Bright-limns were turned and their cool light slowly revealed the long, low quarters. Waking
and rising, the other prentice-lighters hubbubbed with restrained excitement, retelling last night's
theroscade.
"What about that young calendar!" Hanging by his arms from one of the low, steeply angled
rafters, Punthill Plod gave a saucy whoop that set the sleepier ones complaining. Morning always
were his better part of the day.
"Aye! She was a bit of a fine dig," Tremendus Twörp leered, "though she couldn't wit worth
a goose."
"Did ye hear of Grind-yer-bones last night?" Plod enthused. "We might get marked. Ye
heard him: said prentices ain't been puncted in a precious long time!"
"I'm not getting one," Rossamünd declared, with more gladness than he meant to show.
"Why not, Rosey?" Plod stopped his rafter swinging.
"Lampsman Puttinger said I did not have a hand in killing anything."
"Oh" was all Plod said.
"Ye don't sound too troubled, Rosey. Don't ye want one?" Twörp added. "Perhaps there
should 'ave been more so you could've got yerself a kill." He gave a sardonic grin.
"That was more than enough for me," Crofton Wheede put in, wide-eyed. "I thought we were
done in and no mistaking! It was like how me poor mammy ended all over again..."
"Don't start on yer poor mammy, Wheede!" Eugus Smellgrove called testily, still lying abed.

"Aye," Giddian Pillow offered, "just be grateful they weren't one of them gudgeon-baskets I
heard tell of — them ones running wild out on Gathercoal way."
"They reckon a wit can't stop a rever-man," Wheede shuddered, clearly glad it had not been a
brace of these vile creatures on the road last night.
Gudgeons! Rever-men? Rossamünd sat up. "Where did you hear about that?" he called.
"When we were in Silvernook the other day," Pillow answered. "Some fellow at the skittlealley on the Hackstone Row says he'd come from Makepeace and that it was all abuzz about the
quarry being haunted by some handmade beastie."
Rossamünd nodded, aghast. "but how did it get there? They have to be put somewhere, don't
they? Rever-men don’t just wander about on their own — do they? Someone has to make them.
Someone has to place them."
"It probably got loose from a hob-rousing pit," Pillow offered with a grim and knowing look.
Hob-rousing was the illegal practice of setting monsters against gudgeons and betting on the
winner. Rossamünd thought of Freckle and the rever-man once locked in the hold of the
Hogshead. Maybe that was where they were headed? He was doubly glad now he had set
Freckle free. "But that's wrong!" he exclaimed without thinking.
"Well, I've heard it that the fluffs use the baskets for guards to protect all their jools and
secrets," Plod said finally, rolling his eyes weirdly. He wiggled his fingers as if a great shower of
coins were pouring through them, causing a chuckle among his fellows.
"I heard it said there's some poor fellow back at Winstermill who's all agog from what they
reckon was a gudgeon fight," Smellgrove joined in, fully awake at last. "Was once a fine lighter
but has never been right in his intellectuals since."
"Clap it shut, little frogs!" Assimus snorted, startling them all, stomping into the room to
rouse them out to the sip-pots to wash. "Who talks on rever-men at this fresh hour of day? Git ye
up and git ye at 'em! Out for yer scrubbing! Move yer carcasses!"
A line of tubs ran along a wall in a small yard adjacent to the foreyard of the northern keep.
While the shivering boys scrubbed themselves in the freezing twilight, the topic of talk soon
shifted to more friendly adventures. First it was the mischief done on the last Domesday visit to
Silvernook and mischief planned for the next — for Domesday was the common, weekly vigilday and their one occasion of rest. Much to the other boys' bemused disapproval, Rossamünd had
never joined them on these half-drunken jaunts, preferring to spend his money on pamphlets and
remain behind at the manse reading. In the time since he started at Winstermill he had ventured
down to Silvernook only twice to get more pamphlets and to see if he might meet again with
Fouracres, who had helped him so much on his way to prenticing. The restless postman had not
had an opportunity to come to Winstermill. Silvernook and the dwellings of the Brindleshaws
were his range, and he was so devoted to his "custom" — as he called the people he delivered to,
he rarely had a common vigil himself. Their reunions had therefore been necessarily and
unsatisfactorily brief, and Rossamünd was still hoping for a day where they might sit and talk in
earnest.
The boys' chatter changed again to the most common topic — in what cothouse each prentice
thought he would like to serve once prenticing was done and they had all become lampsmen 3rd
class.
"I want to go to Makepeace Stile," Plod said eagerly. "They work close with them obstaculars
to catch bandits and dark traders and such."
"What about Haltmire?" pondered Twörp, leering at Wheede. "Ye get to see plenty of nickers
there."
"They don't send lampsmen 3rd class out there Twörp!" Wheede rose to the goad. "It's too
unfriendly for new lighters."
"Aye," said Smellgrove, "the way ye was whimpering last night I can see why."
Rossamünd did not particularly care: where he was sent was where he was sent. Surely it
would all be the same: light the lamp, douse the lamp, light the lamp, douse the lamp, light the

lamp, douse the lamp, always waiting for some monster to spring and deliver a horrible end...
Rossamünd contrived to wash only his face and not remove his shirt before being herded back
to the gallery to dress in full. Today was the day when he was due to change his nullodour: the
Exstinker he had promise both Fransitart and Craumpalin to wear, splashed on the cambric sash
wound about his chest, under his clothes. But his precious Exstinker was back at Winstermill,
wrapped up in an oilcloth at the bottom of his bed chest at the base of the lumpy cot.
Before putting on his quabard — the vest of rigid proofing all lighters wore over their coats
— he stared at the embroidered figure upon it. Stitched in thread-of-gold was an owl displayed
wings out, talons reaching, sewn over panels of rouge and leuc — red and white. Sagix Glauxes
Rex — the Sagacious Imperial Owl — the sign of an Emperor's man. For the Glory of Ol' Barny
indeed!
The prentice-watch messed on the usual farrats and small beer (never as good as that served at
the Harefoot Dig — always far too watery). Tomorrow's breakfast at the manse would be no
better — dark pong bread swilled down with saloop, a drink of sassafras and sugar boiled in milk.
The morning after that it would be farrats once more, then pong the next, then farrats, over and
over.
Breakfast wolfed down, they paraded out in the yard of the northern keep before the sun had
even peeped. Now they must douse all the lanterns back to Winstermill and be in time for limes,
the morning interval between first morning instructions and second. This was where the prentices
still at Winstermill were formed up to await the return of the lantern-watch, each given lime-laced
pints of small beer to fend off ill-health. Ready for this returning and looking forward to limes,
the boys stood shivering in the glow of bright seltzer lamps, the morning showing as a cold halo
in a low and murky sky. This was the time of day figured safest, when night monsters had found
their beds once more and daytime prowlers were still waking.
Surly and overtired, Assimus, Bellicos and Puttinger poked the boys into correct dressing
with rough tugs and prods of their fodicars. Grindrod called them to attention and marched them
out the gates. Back to Winstermill they went, to a little rest before resuming the solemn routines
of their prenticing.
Back to Winstermill, that is, except for Rossamünd. He had been left behind as a courtesy
from the lamplighter-sergeant to rouse the calendars and accompany them to the manse.
Returning from the foreyard, he passed Mister Bolt, the night-clerk and uhrsprechman, sitting in
the north keep guardroom behind a small dirty stool that served as his table, and asked him the
time of day.
Groggy, smelling of claret and squinting with lack of sleep, Mister Bolt peered at Rossamünd.
"Quota hora est, he asks!" the night-clerk said, taking out his heavy fob. "What time is it
indeed?" He glared at its cryptic face beadily. "Why, lantern-stick, it's a little before the half
hour of five-o'-the-clock on this cruel chill's morning, and the bad half of a good hour till the
drummer wakes the rest and I get to me fleabag" (by which he meant his bed).
By their own instruction the calendars were not to be troubled for another hour. At last
Rossamünd had a moment of his own, without press or crowd or the impel of orders — a
precious-rare commodity, he had learned, in a lamplighter's life. Secreting himself in a dim
corner beneath the stairs that went up to the gallery, he hoped to remain inconspicuous, perhaps to
read a little of his new pamphlet and avoid being discovered and set to some odious task.
He failed.
As the drums ratplanned again to wake the rest of the cothouse for another day, the housemajor, on his way down to breakfast, spied Rossamünd. "You there! Lantern-stick! The one I
spoke with last night," the officer barked. "Feed the dogs. Their meat is in the kitchen."
"Aye, sir," the young prentice said with sinking wind. It was properly the duty of the housewatch to feed the dogs. The house-major must have known that though Rossamünd had been left
behind, he was still part of the lantern-watch. He had rarely ever met a dog of any sort — they
were not allowed in Madam Opera's — and any time he had, the meeting had not been

comfortable. Shaken, the young prentice nevertheless obeyed without demur, asking directions of
a kitchen hand.
"They're in the yard of the south keep," a rough-shaven kitchen hand explained, handing
Rossamünd a rotund pot of dig vittles. "Mind the weight!"
Wrapping his arms about the pot's wide girth, Rossamünd did not find the burden a trouble
and, arms full of reeking offcuts, made his way to the southern keep of Wellnigh. He wrestled the
great pot past the house-watchmen, a half quarto of haubardiers pacing about the edges of the
road who jostled him as he tried to get around them.
"Move your ashes, scrub!"
Tottering across the Pettiwiggin, he thumped with his elbow at the small sally port in the wall
of the south keep yard. No one answered, and he kept thumping until one of the haubardiers
came over and, with a sardonic grin, unlocked and opened the port to let him through. In the
small, high-walled space beyond were the great kennels, built up against the keep's base, barred
with stout iron founded in stone. This was the cage for the dogs, five Greater Derehunds —
enormous creatures with spotted flanks and slobbering jowls — that waited hungrily. Such dogs
were kept at many cothouses and at Winstermill too, there to howl and yammer with great
commotion if a nicker was ever near.
The Derehunds began an awful growling as soon as they saw Rossamünd, all five hunched
and threatening, a terrible gurgling rattle in their throats, pointed ears flat along their pied necks.
"Hallo there," Rossamünd tried, and waggled some stinking offal.
With a jerk one hound gave a savage bawling bark that sent the rest mad, leaping over each
other, back and forth, crashing against the bars, baying like all wretchedness was loose.
Rossamünd leaped backward, scrambling and slipping on grimed cobbles.
Officers, lighters and haubardiers rushed from all points, some shouting, some soothing the
dogs in vain, many demanding, "What did ye do?"
Some minor officer — a lieutenant — grabbed Rossamünd hard under the arm and pulled him
away. "What are you practicing at?"
"Nothing, sir!" the young prentice quailed. "I... I just tried to feed them, as ordered."
"He's all right, sir," offered a lighter from the day-watch. "He was a part of that
confustication last night."
"Ah, cunning beasts," said a haubardier in obvious admiration of the hounds, "they can still
tell the stink of the monsters on ye from yester eve."
"Well, get him out of here," demanded the lieutenant. "Find him another task."
"You had best get back to hem harum-scarum ladies, lad," the lighter said quietly. "Quick
now, before the dogs get wilder."
Rossamünd gratefully left the pot and went back to the northern keep, up the stairs, over the
gallery to the temporary lodgings of the calendars.
Threnody greeted his polite good morning with little more than a cold stare and silence.
Dolours looked as poorly as she had on the night previous.
"May I offer you a draught mixed with bellpomash, m'lady?" Rossamünd inquired.
"You most certainly may," she returned gratefully.
Rossamünd went quickly to the kitchen and asked permission of the cook to prepare the
restorative. The best he could do was mix it with saloop and add some lordia too, but Dolours did
not fuss. She drank it down and returned the bowl to him with a smile.
"My thanks to you. We will be ready presently."
He waited a goodly while by the door as the calendars prepared to leave.
Charllette the pistoleer was to stay behind and take a post-lentum back east by way of the
Roughmarch, the threwdish gap through the Tumblesloe Heap. She would return to the Lady Vey
and the stronghold of the calendars, bearing with her dispatches and the bodies of the two dead.
Dolours, Threnody and the wounded dancer Pandomë, who lay unconscious on a bier with her
face and head entirely bandaged, were to go west to Winstermill. Despite the bellpomash brew,

the bane still showed the strain of her malady and Rossamünd asked after her health once more.
"Why, I thank you, young lighter," Dolours replied. "Truly I would not have set out so ill had
not the need been pressing. You understand the life of service, I am sure."
Rossamünd nodded wholeheartedly. "I shall recommend you to our physician when we
return, m'lady. They say there's nothing he can't mend."
Dolours smiled and Threnody frowned.
When all was ready the small party set out in pouring rain — fighting weather, Europe would
have called it. For a moment Rossamünd wondered where the terrible fulgar might be. Was she
still in Sinster — that city famous for its transmogrifying surgeons, the makers of lahzars — to be
mended after the near-fatal spasming of her artificial fulgar's organs? Would she soon return, as
she had promised, to see how he was getting on? A quiet ache set in his gall: despite his
abhorrence of her trade — at her indiscriminate killing — he was actually missing the
teratologist. After all, she had rescued him from the scurrilous rogue Poundinch.
Instead of an ox dray, the calendars traveled easy in a small covered curricle drawn by two
sturdy donkeys. These were led by a laconic leer Rossamünd had never properly met but knew
from the milling of rumor and reputation to be Mister Clement. The fellow confirmed this with a
sour introduction to the calendars, giving them all a dour look with his weird yellow and olivedrab eyes, as if the task was a great inconvenience. Before the leer put on his sthenicon
Rossamünd marveled at his wrong-colored eyes, so different from Sebastipole's. For Clement
was a laggard, like Licurius, better able to spy things hidden in shadows and darkness and nooks
than a falseman, but less capable of spotting lies. His biologue in place, the leer took them out on
the road. He talked little, instead bending all his energy to searching ahead and aside for the
evidences of a monster.
After his experience at the strangling hands of Licurius, Rossamünd walked a little uneasily
beside Clement. Exposed to the foul weather and equally silent, the young prentice was
nevertheless grateful to have the leer's senses to forewarn them. That at least was a genuine
comfort.
The calendars themselves also proved ill-disposed to speak, and the whole journey from
cothouse to manse was accomplished in silence.
They traveled back through the Briarwood, back through its hinting threwd, passing the scene
of last night's violence. Despite a wet day, stains of spilled blood still showed black in the dirt of
the road. Under a heavy guard of haubardiers, with the chortling morning chorus of birds making
light of the grisly work, a toiling fatigue party from Wellnigh House's day-watch struggled to
build and light a pyre of the fallen nickers and dead horses. The bodies of slain monsters needed
to be disposed of promptly, for it was held that, left to rot, a nicker's corpse always attracted more
of the living kind.
Walking through the Harrowmath, Rossamünd started and stared at every rustle in the high
grass. The rain increased and his thrice-high filled with water, which spilled inconveniently
whenever he moved his head.
With each lamp they passed he felt a steady urgency to wind out the bloom, even though it
was day. He had been in lessons (Readings on Our Mandate and Matter with Mister Humbert) in
which the prentices were belabored with the notion that the Conduit Vermis was the spine about
which many towns and villages grew; that the road allowed these towns to be knit as more than
just remote settlements; that it was for the lamplighters to toil and keep the Wormway clear; that
if they did not, then the whole of civilization might fail and fall to rapid ruin. To light the lamps
meant that the kingdoms of humankind could sleep well at night. Every lamp they passed was a
memorial to him of this heavy responsibility. He sighed, letting his fodicar drag in the soupy
slick that filmed the hard-packed clay of the revered road.
"Lift your lantern-crook, boy!" came the rough command of the leer, and the young prentice
obeyed with an unthinking start. Shrugging his shoulders against the wet, Rossamünd pushed on.
Between the silence of the calendars, the taciturn concentration of Clement, and the broad,

brooding Harrowmath, he lamented how different life might be as a vinegaroon or — he
wondered for a moment — even as Europe's factotum.

4
An Interview With The Surgeon
post-lentum(s) (noun) among the carriages more commonly used to traverse the highroads and byroads of the
Half-Continent, post-lentums deliver mail and taxi people (for a fare) from one post to another. They are manned by
a lenterman or driver, an escort (usually armed and armored) known as a side-armsman or cock robin (if wearing a
red weskit of Imperial Service) or prussian (if wearing a deep blue weskit of private employment) and one or two
backsteppers — either splasher boys or post runners or amblers — sitting upon the seats at the back of the roof.
When traveling dangerous stretches, another backstepper may join — a quarter-topman possessing a firelock and a
keen gaze — for extra protection. This crew is collectively referred to as lentermen. Po'lent is the common term for
these vehicles, an abbreviated derivation of po(st) lent(um).

W

instermill grew step-by-step before them. An ancient stronghold, massive and lonely
upon the flat moors of the Harrowmath, it was familiar and welcome to Rossamünd already. He
still marveled at the squat, gray cartography of its lichen-blotched roofs and their chimney spires,
at the mightily thick outer walls and the foundations upon which the fortress was lifted high
above the plain. When he had first observed it those two months gone he had thought it like some
great, overgrown manor house, but now he knew the fortress to be much more. Once a small
outpost of the Tutins of old, the fortress of Winstermill had accreted over the centuries: towers
added, floors added, the whole mound of Winstreslewe built up and encircled with a thick wall.
Once it had stood at a junction of trade routes; now it had grown over and submerged these roads
in its footings. The western run of the Wormway and the north-south course of the Gainway
made tunnels in Winstermill's foundations and joined beneath the very fortress. As far as
Rossamünd knew, these tunnels were called the Bowels — if they had any other name he had not
heard it. In the evening, great grilles were lowered over their gaping mouths to prevent monsters
and vagrants from setting up a home there, and mighty steams of repellents were regularly flushed
through in the small hours of the morning to force out any unwelcome lurkers. These duties were
reserved for the house-watch, and Rossamünd was glad of that. Not in all recorded history of the
current Empire had a monster ever won its way into the manse.
The broad Imperial Spandarion that usually flapped proud and defiant above the battlements
hung limp now in the day's damp. The morning was already long, limes missed and second
morning instructions well under way. Rossamünd had never felt so tired. Passing through the
mighty gates, their arrival counted by the tally-clerk and his cursors, they were greeted by one of
the house-guard calling down to them from the wall.
"Hoi there, me fellows! There's Lady Dry-stick ready to lash us with her dim-wits. Wit us
too, like ye did our mates!" News of Threnody's actions had already traveled ahead.
"Don't goad at her, chum," came another. "She's as likely to fish us as soon as fart, from what
I hear!"
"Fish was a vulgar term for frission. Rossamünd shot a look to Threnody, sitting stiff on the
seat behind. The young calendar's chin jutted high in supercilious display, yet she betrayed her
anger with the clenching and unclenching of her fine jaw.
The donkeys' hooves and carriage wheels made a harsh grinding in the white quartz gravel
that formed a broad drive from the gate to the manse's main entrance. The drive skirted three
acres of paved ground known as the Grand Mead, which fronted the manse itself. It was large
enough to contain kennels, several strong-houses, room for the parading and evolutions of the
whole fortress and yet still allow for the frequent coming and going of carriages and other
conveyances. There was even space for a well-tended green by the wall of the manse proper with
benches and a grove of pines for the officers to sit beneath. Here a convention of territorial rooks

would caw and cackle every evening before returning to their roost in the manse's ridge-caps,
eyeing everything angrily and keeping pigeons away. At the end of the drive stood the Scaffold,
a single gaunt tree that Rossamünd had observed the night he first arrived.
As he walked by the curricle, Rossamünd watched a company of haubardiers working through
drills under the shadow of the eastern wall, standing and moving in well-practiced order. He
could not see the other lantern-sticks; they would be at readings now, suffering dire boredom in
the Lectury with Mister Humbert. A post-lentum came through the gates, overtook them and
rattled on to the covered stables to the right of the main building. The postilion blew his long
horn to herald their arrival. The post is here! The post is here! its call declared.
Rossamünd felt an instinctive thrill, the sweet anticipation of a letter from a loved one —
from Verline perhaps (it had been a whole month since her first missive), or Fransitart... or maybe
even one from Europe.
It was obvious the arrival of the calendars was expected, for a welcome of officials turned out
in their finest threads emerged from the manse. As Clement took the curricle through to halt
before the front doors, the women were greeted first by Podious Whympre, the Master-of-Clerks.
An officious man who smiled too much, he was dressed in sumptuous Imperial scarlet. He had
only that year become acting second-in-command of Winstermill, and with the promotion his
influence had grown. Joining him, and accompanied by all their particular secretaries, were other
senior martial bureaucrats: the Quartermaster, the niggardly Compter-of-Stores, the rotund
General-Master-of-Labors and his Surveyor-of-the-Works, and a scowling General-Master-ofPalliateers. Even the rarely seen captain-of-Thaumateers was in attendance. A small file of
clerks — chief of which was Witherscrawl — followed, along with a guard of troubardier
pediteers in their bright lour-covered, proof-steel loricas and soft square pagrinine hats. Rather
than their usual poleaxes, the pediteers bore high umbrellas to provide a roof against the steady
drizzle.
Yet one among them refused to dress the dandy. A skulking fellow in a midnight-dark
soutaine, he hovered at the Master-of-Clerks' back and stared viperlike with ill-colored eyes of
red orb and pale blue iris. This was Laudibus Pile, leer and faithful falseman to Podious
Whympre. He could often be seen whispering at the Master-of-Clerk's ear, a tell-tale saying what
was truth and what was lie. To Rossamünd he was a false-seeming falseman, and he was glad he
had little to do with this fellow or his master.
The one person missing was the Lamplighter-Marshal.
"Lady Threnody, you honor us at last." The Master-of-Clerks bowed, a perfect study of
civility. "And Lady Dolours. We are met again. It has been almost a year since you helped us
against those brutish ashmongers in the Owlgrave."
Dolours gave the man a tired, knowing look.
"And what a relief it was," the Master-of-Clerks continued without pause, spreading his arms
to include the various lampsmen in attendance, "to receive report that our tireless lighters did
rescue you this yesternight gone. How happy it is you have both arrived sound and intact."
The bane had been looking most poorly but now she presented a hale front. "Clerk-Master
Podious Whympre," she said with a subtle frown at the falseman Laudibus a-whisper-whisper
behind the man, "A delight." She paused. "For the good deeds done last night I am grateful.
Your Marshal is not present, I see. Matters more pressing keep him from us?"
Even Rossamünd knew that the absence of the Lamplighter-Marshal was a great affront. Of
all the officers of Winstermill, the Lamplighter-Marshal was not only the most senior, but also
had the reputation as the most punctual and gentlemanly.
"Ah, ever-astute, Lady Bane, you do your clave proud. The Lamplighter-Marshal, I am
certain, would give sincere apology for his nonattendance were we able to find him." Though the
Master-of-Clerks' face was apologetic, his eyes were bright.
Dolours stepped past and went to push through the gaggle of officers and clerks. "It is well,
for proper meetings must sadly wait; our sister Pandomë is deadly hurt. I hear your physic

Crispus is of fair repute. Would you consent to his immediately attending to her wounds?"
The Master-of-Clerks was obliged to step quickly, moving from the precious cover of his
troubardier-held umbrella and leaving his falseman behind. "Indeed, madam, Doctor Crispus is a
man of many parts," he said, his smile broadening almost to a sneer as a troubardier hurried to
cover him with a high parasol. "Alas, however, he is gone away to Red Scarfe to tend a
disturbing outbreak of the fugous cankers. Ah, but all is not a loss! Grotius Swill, our surgeon
and the physician's locum, remains with us. He will serve, I'm sure."
The calendars looked less than pleased.
"Whatever you might provide," Dolours said wearily.
Even as the bureaucrats dispersed, the Lamplighter-Marshal, the Earl of the Baton Imperial of
Fayelillian himself, hastened from the doors of the manse. He was a grand-looking old man with
long white mustachios, although unfashionable; he wore no wig, rather his own hair kept short as
a true lighter's. His mottle-and-harness were simple — quabard over platoon-coat — worn easy
and naturally. In a way he looked just like an ordinary lampsman, the most physically capable,
shrewd and dangerous ordinary lampsman you might ever meet. Yet there was a barely
perceptible atmosphere of weariness about him, a sense of harassment and overwork. He
acknowledged the calendars warmly enough, saying through a rueful smile, "My most sincere
apologies to ye, dear, dear Lady Dolours; what a bumbling scrub I must seem. It is unforgivable
that I was not here in the first to meet ye." Mustachios a-bristle, the Marshal flashed a look of
veiled wrath at Podious Whympre. "I would have been more timely, but found myself needlessly
summoned to the farthest end of the manse. I have only now been told of yer arrival."
Nodding an obsequious bow, the Master-of-Clerks tut-tutted. "Those new clerks are quite
useless. Unacceptable, sir, unacceptable. They shall be most particularly reprimanded."
There was a small silence.
The Lamplighter-Marshal offered his hand to Dolours. "It's clear ye're unwell, m'dear. Let's
withdraw to the quiet of my duty room. I hope its comforts will make amends. How is yer bonny
august, the Lady Vey? She sends communication?"
The two turned their backs on the Master-of-Clerks and, without a further word to him, went
inside. With a pointed show of proper manners, Podious Whympre bowed to their retreating
backs.
As the bureaucrats dispersed, two porters were summoned to carry Pandomë to the manse's
infirmary. Rossamünd had never — thank the Signal Stars! — been required to attend an
appointment with the surgeon. Brought by especial request of the Master-of-Clerks, Grotius
Swill, according to the common-mess rumor, held staunchly to the surgeon's creed of amputating
first and investigating later; of fissicking about far too much in people's innards rather than
administering the tried and proved chemical cures of dispensurist or physician. How did the
rhyme go?

Honorius Ludius Grotius Swill
Saws off your limbs, but eschews the pill;
For a cough he removes fingers, a sneeze he'll take toes,
And fevers will cost you your ears and your nose.
Rossamünd shuddered — he would never allow someone to dig about inside him, and could
not understand why lahzars and the like would pay to submit themselves to such abominable
treatment.
With Threnody walking alongside her injured sister, he led the way through the empty
vestibule down the Forward Hall and left through the right angles and long passages that led to
the infirmary. They moved through the domain of the bureaucracy of Winstermill, a place that
had a reputation as a strange and uncomfortable place for those not of the clerical set, even for
experienced lighters. They passed white wooden doors from which would sporadically emerge a

secretary, clerk or servant. These would pass in turn with a muttered apology or impatient sneer,

to disappear in another white port along the way. Going deeper into the manse, the smoky
perfume of the dark, venerable wood of furniture, beam and wainscot soaked the atmosphere. It
grew strongest as they entered a large passage known as the Broad Hall. Several doors went at
intervals down either side, the spandarions of the local city-states mounted between. The first
door on the left was painted a lime green.
Through this was the infirmary.
Rossamünd stepped up and gave a reluctant tap. An epimelain answered almost instantly, her
broad brown skirts and oversized apron filling the entire doorway. The woman's expression
exquisitely state, Yes? What do you want? I have no time for this! without the use of a single
word.
Hat in hand, Rossamünd bowed. "This wounded lady needs a physic's mending, miss."
The epimelain looked over him to the stricken calendar, to the porters, then to Threnody and
back to Rossamünd. She gave a soft "humph," turned and sashayed away. This was enough
permission for the porters, who immediately went in, shoving Rossamünd aside. Threnody
followed them without a thank-you. Within was a long hall, well-made beds down either side,
pillows arranged identically against the wall with prim regimental exactitude, bed ends forming a
squeezy aisle along which the epimelain's skirts brushed and rustled noisily as she hurried
between. A few beds were occupied, various ailing souls coughing or sighing in their discomfort,
and another woman dressed similarly attended the bedside of one of the ill.
Behind a lectury desk was the person they sought: Honorius Ludius Grotius Swill, the carver
of lamplighters, their surgeon. He was short and thin and sported a meticulous mustache and a
fixed frown. Dressed immaculately, he sat with a flam-toothed saw in one hand and a hone
gripped in the other, sharpening the blade to and for, careless of the patients about him.
"Your pardon, surgeon."
With a small start, Surgeon Swill stood and faced the woman. He looked at the group a little
confusedly. "Come, come," he said, finally fixing his attention on Rossamünd, "let me look you
over."
"Ahh... not me, sir." Rossamünd gestured nervously to the stretcher-borne Pandomë. "Her."
The porters laid the bier on the closest empty bed and retreated promptly without so much as
a good-bye, leaving Rossamünd and Threnody with Swill.
Threnody stepped up, chin high. "I'll have you know, sir, that I have been under the steady
knife of the finest transmogrifier in or outside the Empire. Before I submit her to your ill-learned
investigations, quacksalver, I would have you understand this: my mother is the Lady Vey, and
should you mishandle my sister, your days of lawful practice shall end."
Rossamünd looked at the floor. This was surely not the way tot go on if she was seeking to
become a prentice-lighter.
The surgeon looked at her coldly. "Moving about the odd organ is enough for some to claim
great talent, but there are subtler things one can do with a knife. My ill learning will be learning
enough to set your sister to rights." He took up a weird-looking monocle, its protruding end a
completely opaque black smoothness, and squinted it into his left eye. It was an even stranger
instrument than Rossamünd had seen Doctor Verhooverhoven wearing at the Harefoot Dig when
treating Europe so ill from spasming. It was some kind of obscure biologue, he was sure,
designed to make a surgeon's or physician's work more effective.
Threnody stood close and watched suspiciously as Swill bent over the bed and scrutinized
the injured, unconscious Pandomë, peering pedantically through the monocle at every cut, gouge
and contusion. The epimelain hovered, waiting to serve any command. Swill worked in silence
but for a periodic "mm-him" and the scratching of a stylus on paper as he made notes of what he
discovered.
Fascinated, Rossamünd shuffled forward to get a clearer sight of what the surgeon saw.
Swill straightened and pinned him with a wintry eye. "Stand back, prentice! It is not
necessary for you to see so closely. Indeed, all of you — please give me space to work."

Threnody bridled. "Tell me, surgeon, can you mend her?" she asked sternly. "Or should we
wait for Doctor Crispus?"
Swill straightened and, after a pause where he clearly calculated his answer, said sourly, "I
might serve under him, young madam, yet I can tell you I have observed and performed things
Doctor Crispus would not credit as possible. What the good doctor has spent a lifetime acquiring,
I learned in months. So, to you, dear, I say 'yes' to your first inquiry, and 'no' to your second.
This has become intolerable! If you want the best for your sister-in-arms, then I must be allowed
to labor in quietude. Do me the service of leaving!"
Spreading his thin arms, Swill went to usher them out of the surgery. To Rossamünd's
dismay, Threnody was clearly reluctant to depart and made to stand her ground. Swill balked at
her stubborn immobility, and only after a foolish, pointless standoff did she allow herself to be
guided out to the less gruesome side of the door. It closed with a deliberate thump.
"Do you know much of this Grotius Swill fellow, lamp boy?" Threnody demanded.
"He seems competent enough, miss. I think he is supposed to be under Doctor Crispus'
charge," Rossamünd offered helpfully, ignoring the girl's imperious tone. "I must confess I've
never been ill enough to need either his or the doctor's work."
Threnody looked less than satisfied. "He did not seem to be under anyone's charge to me.
He'd better do it right: I made no idle threat in there."
Rossamünd was not in the smallest way impressed. "I ought to return you to your Lady
Dolours," he said simply.
At the Lamplighter-Marshal's duty room the smiling registry clerk Inkwill greeted them.
"You'd best go in, m'lady."
Threnody entered into the mystery of the duty room, leaving Rossamünd without a word of
thanks or farewell.
"You might want to idle here, Prentice Bookchild," suggested Inkwill kindly. "I think that
young lass will be needing more guidance shortly." This was an unwelcome hint, or so
Rossamünd thought, that he and his fellows might have to put up with this pompous peerlet for a
good sight longer.
As he waited an unwelcome pressure built in his bladder, but Rossamünd dared not leave.
Instead he paced the forward Hall uncomfortably back and forth, pressure growing, until the door
opened with a bang. Sergeant Grindrod emerged from the duty room looking grave. He nodded
brusquely, said nothing and moved on. Soon after, Threnody stalked out, followed by Dolours
and the Lamplighter-Marshal himself. "What say you, young fellow? We're going to have a lady
in our midst!"
The Lamplighter-Marshal had clearly come to his decision. Threnody was to be the first girl
prentice at Winstermill.

5
Threnody Goes Forth
Fusil (noun) also known as a fusee or a carabine or a harquebus; a lighter musket with a shortened barrel that
makes it simpler loading, is less cumbersome to swing about in thickets and woodland, and saves considerable
weight. Its shorter length also makes it handy as a club when the fight comes to hand strokes. This makes the fusil a
preferred weapon of ambuscadiers and other skirmishing foot soldiers, and also comes a-handy for the drilling of
smaller folk in the handling and employment of arms.

T

he morning did not improve after its irregular beginning. Rossamünd took Threnody to
the Room of Records, where she gave all her particulars and was paid the Emperor's Billion; the
master proofener, where she received her two quabards — one full dress and one for continual
day wear; the library, for her books on matter and drills and regulations; the armory, for her fusil
and fodicar; and every other necessary place. Throughout, she showed nothing but arrogance and
high-handed rudeness. She near drove the normally good-natured Inkwill to distraction with each
painfully extracted detail for the register. She wrangled with the proofener's yeomen over the
constitution of regulation dress. She insulted the librarian over a matter book, insisting it was
arrant drivel, that the books she had learned from back at Herbroulesse were far superior. She
quibbled with the wool-slippered armorer over the one-sequine pledge required to secure her
firelock and fodicar. And throughout she ignored Rossamünd in the manner of someone used to
the attendance of servants.
He had led her from place to place without complaint and with an ever-sinking feeling and the
sharp jabbing of an overfull bladder. Joyful relief had come only when he finally showed
Threnody to her own newly appointed cell where her luggage waited for her. While she changed
to a lighter's harness, Rossamünd made a quick dash for the jakes and returned in time for her to
emerge with a wrinkled nose.
"Ugh! The stench of too many boys, too close together," she said.
Rossamünd stayed mum. He had spent his life with too many boys, and it had made him
insensible to any such odor. "Come along," he said instead, and guided her up to the dim, highceilinged mess hall in the rear quarters of the manse, where a roll of drums declared middens was
about to be served. There the other prentices arrived as a mass, and, as they lined up, stared in
open wonder at this newly presented lantern-stick before them.
Threnody went forth now in a rich, elegant variation of the gear of a lamplighter; silken
platoon-coat, quabard, long-shanks, galliskins and a black tricorn sitting prettily upon her
midnight tresses — of the finest tailoring, as sumptuous as that of any of the Master-of-Clerks'
flunkies. The other prentices, by comparison, looked like drab weeds.
Threnody ignored them all as she had ignored Rossamünd. In their turn the boys kept
unashamedly at their gawping, some turning puzzled looks on her fortunate companion.
Rossamünd felt anything but fortunate as he received their middens meals, served by two
short, fat cooks from the pots hanging in the gigantic fireplace at the farther end of the room.
Steaming with faintly appetizing smells, the larger pot was, as always, full of skilly, a savory
gruel of leftover meat; the smaller with vummert, a mash of sprouts and peas.
Threnody scowled at the food, at the cooks, at the boys and at the hall as she sat at one of a
pair of long tables that filled the mess.
"Are... are you all right, miss?" Rossamünd asked cautiously, painfully aware that she had just
occupied the usual seat of a less-than-friendly lad known as Noorderbreech.
"Yes." Threnody's voice cracked a little. "No... What care is it of yours—?"

"Look here, miss, I..." complained Noorderbreech, leaving his place in the line of unserved
boys. "Look here, normally I sit there."
Threnody did not move, did not even give a hit she had even heard.
"And — and that would be my apple," Noorderbreech insisted.
A look came into Threnody's eye that Rossamünd recognized — a haughty, dangerous look.
She glanced at the fruit mentioned, which sat on the table before her. It appeared to be the same
as all the other apples placed evenly along the benches for the prentices to take away with them
when the main meal was done. Threnody picked it up with a study of feminine grace. "This
apple, do you mean?" she said, and bit into it deliberately, daring Noorderbreech to retaliate.
The lad puffed himself up as threateningly as he might.
Uncowed, Threnody crunched away as happily as if she were on a vigil-day hamper. Ever
boy — and the kitchen hands too — held their breath.
"Give me my apple, girly," Noorderbreech growled, "and go take yer place at the far end.
This is where we sit."
"This apple?" She took another bite. "You mean this apple, don’t you?... Have it then! "
The apple flew the full length of the bench in a well-aimed arc. It landed with a crack and a hiss
right in the midst of the hottest coals of the fire.
Everyone became very, very still. Some even stopped chewing.
Rossamünd wanted to shrink in on himself.
"I'll sit where I like and eat what I please, you loose-jawed bumpkin," she hissed with such
vehemence spittle flew.
Wide-eyed, Noorderbreech stumbled back, mouth agape as if her were trying hard to prove
Threnody's insult true, finding for himself a vacant place at the far end of the other bench.
The prentices sitting near Threnody shifted away, afraid or glaring. No one other than
Rossamünd dared put himself too near. Angry mutters began to stir. Rossamünd did not know
what to say and fixed his attention on his food, avoiding every other eye in the room. Yet the
filling of stomachs finally took priority even over so shocking an event as just witnessed. The
hubbub of general chatter and the patter of forks and spoons on plates swelled once more.
Threnody made to eat as if naught was wrong. "Who can eat this glue?" she snarled
eventually, pushing the slopping pannikin of skilly away in disgust. "Must everything be against
me today?"
"Against you, miss?" Rossamünd dared after a few pensive chews.
"I save us from the ambush of those ungotten baskets," she suddenly fumed, floodgates
inexplicably let free, "and all Lady Dolours can dwell upon is the possibility of bad things that
never happened! We were thrown about inside the drag, tumbled roughly in its wreck, and
Dolours so unwell she was scarce capable of fighting. What else was I supposed to do?"
Remembering the startling and dangerously incompetent effect of her wild witting,
Rossamünd could not quite see how Threnody had done any more than make a bad situation
worse. The way he remembered the play of things, it had ultimately been Dolours who had saved
them all, the lamplighters included. Indeed, given that the prentices had dispatched two of the
horn-ed nickers themselves, Rossamünd figured a little more gratitude might have been shown.
Still, he held his tongue: he would not gainsay a woman in her distress, especially not one as
fiery as this. She had done her bit, and had not flinched from the fight — and none should fault
her on that. This girl had passion. All she needed was practice.
"I reckon you did as boldly as you knew to, miss," Rossamünd said matter-of-factly.
She gave a little start, as if this was the last encouragement she expected.
"You saw me take on those wretched bugaboos, then?" she said.
Felt, more like. "Aye, miss."
"I'll not shrink from the fact that I did not defeat them alone. Oh no," she declared with a
flourishing wave of her hand, "my sisters and I did it together, mastered and destroyed the
nickers."

Rossamünd thought on the valiant fight the calendars had made as a troupe. "It was a
genuine, heroical spectacle, miss," he said. "I've never seen such a thing as happened last night."
"So it was, I know. Yet they made me apologize!" Threnody seethed. "They made me
apologize to that... that pompous muck hill."
By "apologize" Rossamünd could only assume she had been made to repent of her clumsy, illadvised witting; and by "pompous muck hill" she meant Grindrod, the lamplighter-sergeant. He
thought she might consider herself fortunate not to have been made to apologize to the lampsmen
and prentices as well — it was their lives she had endangered.
"Yet it was we who were refused at Wellnigh!" She balled her fists.
"Hardly seems fair, miss."
"Hardly indeed! Pannette dead! Idesloe dead!" the girl continued. "And Dolours insists we
make amends like your lot were the worst done by! To think I actually wanted to join in with you
clod-headed blunderers!"
"Don't count me in too quick with the clodheads or the blunderers, miss," he replied.
"Well, since you are but half the size of all the other boys I suppose it would be hard to do
so."
Rossamünd blinked at the sting of her insult. He knew he was undersized: his
embarrassingly truncated fodicar was continual evidence. Dumbstruck and mortified that those
near might have heard her, he realized she was no longer even paying him any mind. Instead she
was looking up over his right shoulder. Rossamünd became aware of the looming of somebody
there. He looked up to find Arimus Arabis at his back.
The oldest, most worldly-wise of the prentices, Arimis Ababis was top of the manning lists —
both by letter fall and ability. The frankest shot with a fusil, he also considered himself
handsome. Though Rossamünd could not see it, a gaggle of dolly-mops in Silvernook confirmed
Arabis' self-approval every Domesday, following him about on his jaunts about town and
giggling at everything he uttered.
"Hullo to thee, Rossamünd," he drawled, all charm and swagger. He leaned on Rossamünd's
shoulder and smiled knowingly at Threnody. He must have been down in the cell row cleaning
up for eating and missed her petulant antics with the apple. "I see it's true. We have a fair
Damsel of Callistia among us. Would you care to introduce her?"
"No, he would not," Threnody answered frostily. "Go away!"
Arabis' grin vanished. "Just making friendly," he retorted. He took his hand off Rossamünd's
shoulder immediately and straightened. "But you seem to know as much about being friendly as
you do about witting." He clapped Rossamünd on the back as he left. "Fair travels with that one,
matey," he sneered, and made his way to the other table and immediately began to talk to the
prentices there. Laughter rose, and those boys glanced over at Threnody in disapproval.
Rossamünd glumly sucked at his food.
Threnody raised her chin a little higher — a telltale sign, he was beginning to notice, of
impatience or anger or embarrassment.
"Did I hear your name a-right, lamp boy?" She was staring at him again. It seemed she
needed someone to stare at right now. There was a vindictive gleam growing in her eye. "It can't
really be so, can it? Rossamünd?"
"Many folk find some fun in my name, though I don't," he replied evenly. "It is what it is and
I am who I am."
Threnody had enough grace to drop her gaze.
For a while they ate in silence. Rossamünd fretted vaguely and wished that, just for today,
middens was not quite so long. Threnody poked at her food and screwed up her nose at the small
beer.
"Too small by half," the girl muttered at the beverage.
"It certainly is that, miss. Much better down at the Harefoot Dig," Rossamünd returned,
happy to punctuate the awkwardness.

"Anything anywhere is better than here." Her face was right and unhappy.
Rossamünd could not be quiet in the face of such misery. "I don't understand. If all this
makes you so wretched, why join us?" he asked.
"You're an impertinent little lamp boy, aren't you?" She sniffed loftily. "Since you inquire, I
joined because I wanted to, why else?"
"Why not stay as a calendar?" Rossamünd could not reckon such a thing. Calendars were
mystical, romantic figures who resisted the powerful and helped the destitute. They confronted
monsters whenever these threatened and offered help wherever folk floundered. The way of a
calendar was a goodly adventurous life if ever one existed: making life better, not just mindlessly
destroying monsters for pay like Europe or the other pugnators.
"If you knew my mother..." she replied thickly, almost to herself. "If you, too, were pinned in
the never-relaxing clutch of Marchessa Syntychë, the Lady Vey, August of the Right of the
Pacific Dove, then you would understand. No choices. No schemes of your own."
"But you did have a choice." He could not help himself. "You chose to come to Winstermill
and be a lighter."
Taken aback, the girl pursed her lips. "That was a rare lapse of my mother's. For once she let
her grip slip. Mother and I are always at odds. I go left, she goes right. I say black, she says
white. If I want something one way, she will always have it the other. If I was ever truly listened
to — if what I wanted counted, if she had ever faltered for a moment and remembered that
underneath that waspy bosom she has a heart and think me her daughter..." Threnody seethed —
her haughty mien subsumed by anger. "And not just a tool to preserve her precious clave, then I
might never have become a blighted lahzar!"
Skilly forgotten, Rossamünd listened, motionless.
"I wanted to serve the Dove as a spendonette, blazing away at monsters with my pistols,
not..." Threnody pressed her knuckles against her brow, wincing. "Not spend the rest of my life
swallowing down cures to quell revolting organs that do little more than ache!"
He knew enough about wits to know what she meant. Cathar's Treacle, twice a day, else
headaches, spasms or worse would beset her.
"But once transmogrification was forced on me — well, I chose the path of the lightningthrowing astrapecrith just like the Branden Rose—"
Rossamünd's attention pricked at the mention of Europe by her more famouse title, but he did
not interrupt the talk bubbling out of the girl prentice like froth from an overshaken beer bung.
"—but oh no! Dear Mother was not having that! I was ordered to become a wit because the
clave needed wits, and a good calendar always obeys her august. I would never have manage so
long but for Dolours."
Middens was nearing its end. Other prentices were rising and depositing their pannikins,
mess-kids and tankards on a broad-palette for cleaning.
"Finally I made it all so terrible at home that Mother could bear me no longer. She's agreed to
this," she said, looking about to show the mess hall and all the prentices, "only because it has
made her life simpler, not through any care for me. And here I can become a pistoleer. Not quite
the good calendar spendonette I wished for, but..." She shrugged, all angst submerged with
baffling alacrity. "Well, you have my life's tale before you, so return in kind: why have you
taken up with the lampsmen?"
Though it was time to leave, Rossamünd paused in thought. "Because I had no choice either;
because it was this or be cooped up in the foundlingery forever. I'm a book child, and we get
what we're given and say thank you, like it or no."
How little we have in common then." Threnody tipped her plate, skilly and all, into the pail
just meant for the slops.
*

*

*

*

*

The attack on the calendars' carriage so close to Winstermill had caused no small stir among
the lighters. It was universally agreed that the six fusil-bearing lads should all be marked with a
cruorpunxis for their part. It would be a small drawing of a drip of blood, as was commonly
awarded when a prentice had had a hand in the slaying of a monster but the actual killer was not
clear. In the bosom of many a hardened campaigner there rose too a genuine, almost paternal
concern for the batch of young lantern-sticks. Such was this concern, it prompted the
Lamplighter-Marshal to cancel the prentice-watch and move drills and tutelage normally
conducted in the fields below Winstermill back within the fortress walls. Consequently, that
afternoon, targets — the handling, firing, cleaning and right use of a fusil — was to be held in a
long foyer of dark, aromatic wood called the Toxothanon in the westernmost end of the Low
Gutter below the beautiful Hall of Pageants.
"Right, lads! Stand by twos at your lane!" Benedict, the Under-Sergeant-of-Prentices, stood
behind the gaggle of lantern-sticks. "After two months of this I am expecting good aim and
handy reloading." To those of Rossamünd's watch he said, "As for you lads who prevailed last
night, I am expecting to be dazzled."
Standing in her own firing lane beside Rossamünd, Threnody took the fusil with elegant
aplomb, handling her firelock with an accomplishment equal to all but the frankest shot among
the prentices. Much to Arabis' wry dismay, almost as many of Threnody's shots as his own found
the center bull in the targets fixed to the great bales of straw at the farther end of the lanes.
Benedict twice acknowledged her wicked aim and went as far as to say, "You might make
yourself useful yet, young lady." Her self-satisfaction was so clear, Threnody almost glowed.
Unfortunately Rossamünd, who was an indifferent shot at best, had the worst day at targets
yet, missing many of his shots entirely, one ball lodging itself in a low crossing roof beam. His
woeful aim did not, of course, escape the keen observation of the under-sergeant.
"Master Bookchild! For shame, not one solitary ball true, sir. Sergeant Grindrod would say
your fusil work is a clattering, gaffing embarrassment and a wanton waste of powder. One night's
pots-and-pans for you. Let's hope some good hours scrubbing will teach your arms to hold a
franker aim."
With sinking soul Rossamünd kept to the work: make ready, present, level, fire — over and
over, till they were lined up for Evening Forming and the quiet tolling of mains brought a
merciful end to the training day.
Entering the manse via the sally — the side door and only correct entry for the prentices into
the manse — and stowing their fusils in the armory cupboard, the lads made their way back up to
the mess hall and food. While they ate their boiled pork, boiled cabbage and soggy boiled rice,
Mister Flough, an under-clerk to the Postmaster, hustled into the mess hall crying, "Post is
arrived!" An excited hubble-bubble warmed the room as the under-clerk extracted crushed
packages and bent letters from a mostly empty satchel.
"Clothard... Onion Mile... Bookchild..."
Rossamünd found a letter slapped before him, its water-stained and slightly smeared address
still clearly stating:

Master Rossamünd Bookchild
Apprenticed Lamplighter
Winstermill Barracks
The Harrowmath
Sulk End
Written in Verline's unmistakable hand. Trembling with delight, he prized open the rough
seal. Dated twenty-third of Brumis, it might have taken a week to make its way down the

Humour through High Vesting and back up to Winstermill. It read:

My dear courageous Rossamünd,
Thank you for your dear letter of the 13 of Pulchrys. What gladness we had at
the news of your safe arrival — and my what adventures you had! That Europa
Branden Rose woman sounds very frightening, but what a thrill to meet someone so
famous! You always wanted adventure, and had I been you I think I might have
had my fill of it after such a journey. Little wonder you were at Winstermill fortress
a week late. Still, far better late than absent.
My hope for you is that you are safe, that you are taking to your tasks with ease
and that you have found like-minded souls there to share in further adventures, of
which I am sure you are having many more.
Dear Master Fransitart is still determined to come to you. Time has done nothing
to still his unease, and if, as you say, you know not of what troubles him, then I
must confess to be at a loss. Craumpalin is no help. He and dear Fransitart worry
like old women about you. In fact they seem to be having second thoughts about
your life with the lamplighters, though since you say you are settling to the routine
there they may be less troubled. I shall write more on this when I can.
What is joy, though, is that Master Craumpalin's restoratives have begun their
marvels on your dear Master Fransitart and he suffers much less from the strains
and aches of his seafaring ways. Your old dispenser sent beyond the Marrow to his
contacts (he called them) for the scripts, and they have answered wonderfully. I do
not fret for dear Fransitart's fortunes so much should he travel now.
Master Craumpalin is very happy with your report of how well his bothersalts
performed. He bids me to insist that you keep applying his nullodour, that you
wear it at all times no matter where you are at. This was the first time I ever heard of
such arrangements. I can only assume you know of what he speaks. He was in
serious earnest when he declared this, so I offer you to take him at his word and do
as he bids.
Time for writing letters has come to its end, as anything worthy must.
Take great care of yourself. Return when you are at your liberty to do so. Forever
your
th

Verline
P.S. Dear little Petite Fig (I am sure you remember her — how stoutly you
defended her from the older boys). Well the dear little one said that last night she
saw Gosling moving about the street out front, spying on us from the lane across the
way. Madam declared it impossible, but sent Master Fransitart and Barthomæus
with him to see. Of course they found nothing, and we are all perplexed. Even the
littlest fret, for he has already become a frightful legend though gone only a month.
I did hear that the lad had tried to reunite with his family, but that they did not
want him back. (Who could spurn their own child so? It defies fathoming, as
Master Fransitart would say.) So perhaps he has taken up loitering about here for
want of anywhere else to go? I can only hope naught will come of it. The thought of

his presence oppresses almost as much as when he lived with us. Fransitart will
think of something.
Write back to me soon.
I wager he was hanging about the foundlingery. It's the kind of weak prank he would do. I
am glad to be rid of him! Rossamünd shook his head, banished any further thoughts of his old
foundlingery foe and reread the welcome missive.
Threnody looked at him and then at the paper.
"You have received an amiable letter, I see," she said.
"Aye, miss," he replied, "all the way from my old home."
He was well aware that she had received no friendly communication from home: jealousy
was writ clear on her face. With a slight cough, Rossamünd put the letter away and began to eat.
While pudding (figgy dowdy filled with raisins and all poured over with a runny, barely sweet
sauce) was being served, a summons came for Threnody from the Lady Dolours. Still suffering
her fever, the bane had remained as a guest of the Lamplighter_Marshal, watching over the
recovering Pandomë and convalescing herself. The messenger — a little lighter's boy, too young
to start his prenticing — delivered his message with many a faltering "beg yer pardon" and
clearing of the throat.
"I must go to take my alembants," Threnody declared to Rossamünd and, under the guidance
of the small messenger, departed without another word. As she left, every other set of eyes but
Rossamünd's followed her and their gaze was not kind. She was going to take her plaudamentum,
and whatever other draughts wits needed to keep their organs in check. Now that surely is an
impostition! An image of Europe blossomed in Rossamünd's memory, of her ailing by a dying
fire, teeth blackened by the thick treacle she had drunk, dead grinnlings lying near. How glad he
was not to be dependent on such foul chemistry.
At the very end of mains was a brief period called castigations. This was time when the
record of that day's minor infringements was reiterated and impositions meted out. Following
centuries-old custom, Grindrod stood at the large double doors of the mess hall and boomed,
"Lamplighter-Sergeant-of-Prentices stands at the port!" An ancient civility: the prentices' mess
hall was the refuge of the prentices alone, addressed by those of higher rank only after the seniormost prentice had granted permission. The boys ceased whatever they were doing and sat up
straight. Arabis stood. In a clear confident voice he called, "Cross the threshold and bear up to
the hearth; this hall bids thee welcome!"
Courtesies complete, Grindrod entered into a fine display of regular military step. With him
came Witherscrawl, walking with civilian slouch and bearing a great black ledger — the
Defaulters List, in which each day's misdemeanors were marked. With a look of dark
satisfaction, Witherscrawl stood before the great fire, opened the Defaulters List and stared
shrewishly at the boys. "On this Maria Diem, being the sixth of Pulvis, HIR 1601..." he began,
and proceeded to call off all those caught for minor breaches and the appropriate disciplines.
Rossamünd waited for his own name to be called. He knew what was coming.
"Bookchild, Rossamünd, prentice-lighter — accused of wasting black powder and of
mishandling his firelock, the penalty being one imposition of scullery duties to be performed
three nights hence on the ninth of this month, during the appropriate period."
Pots-and-pans!
The imposition was a guilty weight in Rossamünd's innards. He had washed many a dish in
his time at the foundlingery, but not as a punishment. Rossamünd stared straight ahead, not
lowering his eyes or his chin.
*

*

*

*

*

The next day, Threnody spoke very little to anyone but Rossamünd, even then only briefly, as
a mere acquaintance and not someone to whom she had bared her soul. The experiences of
Noorderbreech and Arabis had quickly schooled the other prentices to leave her alone, and most
of the lads began to mutter against her, darkly declaring that girls should not be allowed to be
lighters. Even so, there were still some secret doe-eyed looks sent her way, and many sniggering
asides when she left the mess hall morning and night to make her treacles. Chin in air, the
calendar ignored them all, rather setting her attention firmly on learning her new trade. She
proved quickly that she already possessed most of the skills required, and those few she did not
know she was apt to learn. Despite having never marched in her life, it took no more than her
first afternoon of evolutions to step-regular with as much facility as the rest. It had taken the
other prentices more than a week and much cursing and bawling from Grindrod and Benedict to
do the same. Rather than being impressed, the boys resented her quick learning and smug selfawareness. Though there had been no open discussion, it became a general accord that none of
them wanted her in his prentice-watch.
Moreover, Threnody's advent posed a disruption to the symmetry of the manse's fine lists, and
any one of the three quartos might be lumbered with her. With the suspension of the nightly
prentice-watch, the question as to which Threnody would join remained unanswered.

6
The Lantern-Watch
skold-shot (noun) leaden balls fired from either a musket or pistol, and treated with various concoctions of
powerful venificants known as gringollsis, particularly devised for the destruction of monsters. These potives are
corrosive, damaging the barrels of the firelocks from which they are fired and eating gradually, yet steadily, away at
the metal of the ball itself. Left long enough, a skold-shot ball will dissolve completely away. Very effective against
most nickers and bogles, some of the best gringollisis actually poison a monster to the degree that it becomes
vulnerable to more mundane weapons.

A

s winter deepened, the weather had steadily soured. Great squalling showers would
blow up from the Grume, or heavy thunderheads roll in over the Sparrow Downs. On the second
morning since the carriage attack and Threnody's arrival, the prentices stepped-regular for
Morning Forming out on Evolution Square. The night's driving rain had blown away to the
northeast, leaving murky puddles and a low solemn sky, and Grindrod stepped over a small mire
as he stood before them.
"The Lamplighter-Marshal and I have revised our conclusions," he called to the two ranks,
obediently still. "Knowing yer way on the highroad is too important to yer survival as fullfledged lighters. I told him that ye should never fear to tread the highroad just because of a single
theroscade. Such is the lighter's life, gentlemen," he declared. "No good will come of keeping ye
from it. Therefore, from tonight, the prentice-watch shall resume."
The murmur that inevitably buzzed among the prentices over breakfast was mostly of
excitement, though there was a groan or three of anxious concern. Some of the boys were quietly
happy to be kept off the road with monsters threatening. Rossamünd's six watch-mates showed
off the bandages about their arms that covered the small droplet-shaped cruorpunxis they had
received the night before. Their marking had been done in evenstalls without much ceremony by
Nullifus Drawk, one of the manse's skolds and its only puctographist. Now even Wheede was
boldly pronouncing to the more timorous, "Ye don't have to worry, chums, if a hob comes acalling — we'll see him off for ye!"
For the remainder of the day, under the earnest eye of Benedict, the prentices practiced the
handling of a fodicar as tool and as weapon: trail arms, port arms, order arms, shoulder arms,
present arms, reverse arms, quarter arms, over and over. Once a fodicar had made no more sense
in Rossamünd's hands than had a harundo stock at Madam Opera's. Effectual instruction and
plenty of time to practice had seen him improve a little, though today this did not prevent him
from fumbling badly once and nearly letting his lantern-crook fall to the ground.
At four o'clock that afternoon, at the end of yet more fodicar drill, the prentices formed up on
the square for Lale — the time when that night's lantern-watch got ready to go out to lighting.
Their backs to the Low Gutter, they waited anxiously as maids brought out saloop and fruit for
sustenance. Waiting for his food, Rossamünd noticed Dolours standing under a tree over on the
Officers' Green, wrapped thickly in furs and observing them all closely. He looked to Threnody
to see if she saw her clave-fellow too but the girl was making a distinct show of not noticing the
bane. Peering from Dolours to Threnody and back, Arabis and his cronies muttered dark things to
each other about the unsuitability of women for the lighting service.
As a post-lentum arrived with its usual hullabaloo, Rossamünd fidgeted and drank his saloop
in nervous gulps. Lantern-watch was resuming on the very night his quarter was rostered to
serve. Grindrod stood before them. One by one each lad was called forward and, after a pause,
Threnody too. She was to be bundled in with him, the other latecomer, to the dismay of his own
quarto and the open relief of the other two, lifting their quarto's number to eight. Rossamünd

gave her a quick look as they lined up before the others, but she kept her eyes front, ignoring him.
While Benedict continued drills with the fourteen left behind, Grindrod marched Q Hesiod
Gæta to the gates, forming them up in the designated place on the southern edge of the Grand
Mead. Lampsmen Assimus, Bellicos and Puttinger were waiting there to take them out for the
night's lighting.
Bellicos thrust a box into Rossamünd's hands, saying simply, "Hold this!"
Taking it, Rossamünd immediately felt a deep unquiet. Looking within he found it contained
many musket balls that shimmered a telltale blue-black rather than the usual dull lead-gray.
Skold-shot! These were bullets treated with pestilent and mordant scripts — poisons and distinct
acids made to do monsters far greater harm than an ordinary ball ever could.
"Before going out tonight," the lampsman said sourly, "each of ye is to load yer fusil with one
of these." With great respect, he took a pair of privers and, from the box Rossamünd still gripped
reluctantly, plucked out a single ball. He held it up for the prentices to see. "Salt lead we call it,
or skold-shot if you prefer. I want ye to take one from the box Master Lately here holds just as I
have with these here privers, and load it into yer firelocks. Let's us give any nasty hobnicker a
good cause to pause."
The prentices obeyed, all but Rossamünd; he carried no fusil, for he had the salumanticum.
He stood and obediently offered the box for the other lads. Each took a turn and a ball. Even the
lampsmen and Grindrod took rounds, filling their own bullet bags from it. When the loading was
done, Rossamünd was grateful to pass the foul-smelling box back to Bellicos.
Grindrod seized Threnody with his steely stare. "I am here to tell ye plain hard: if there's a
peep of witting out of ye — even a were fishing flutter — you'll be out of the lighters with no
coming back!"
The girl lighter frowned truculently in return, but the lamplighter-sergeant appeared not to
notice. He paced before the quarto when they had returned their firelocks to their shoulders. "It
has been decided that a leer should be sent with us to improve the security of ye precious lambs.
Not that we needed fancy-eyed gogglers to watch out for us when we were the lantern-sticks."
Assimus, Bellicos and Puttinger snickered.
Rossamünd struggled to imagine the lamplighter-sergeant as a fumbling, square-gating
lantern-stick.
"Ah!" Grindrod looked toward the manse. "Here struts the fellow now."
Leaving off a conversation with Dolours, a tall dark fellow stepped toward them. He bore a
finely made long-rifle, wore a tall thrice-high upon his head and a dark coachman's cloak that hid
all other attire and accoutrements, including his boots.
Mister Sebastipole! Here at last was the lamplighter's agent who had hired Rossamünd back
at Madam Opera's. He looked straight at Rossamünd — with those disquieting red and blue eyes
that signified his status as a falseman — as he stopped before the prentices, but if Sebastipole
recognized him it did not show.
"Well, Lamplighter's Agent Sebastipole" — there was a coolness in the manner of Grindrod's
address — "are ye ready to coddle we lowly lighters?"
"If you and your lampsmen are ready to depart, Grindrod," Sebastipole replied evenly, "I am
ready to coddle." The leer turned and bowed to the boys. "Good evening, prentices."
"Good evening, sir," they all responded, as was their duty.
"Let us light the way." Sebastipole led the prentice-watch down the stonework of the
Approach. With a sharp toss of his head the leer drank something from a small black bottle.
Whether this was some special concoction to enhance senses or prevent the sthenicon's organs
from growing up his nose, Rossamünd could not know. Drawing in several solid sniffs, the leer
took out his sthenicon from its wooden case under his cloak. Rossamünd was certain he saw a
hint of disgust as the leer strapped the ordinary-looking box to his face.
Rossamünd breathed in the frigid airs. The whole Harrowmath stretched about him, a

slightly undulating moor of rippling, swaying reeds, weeds and grass. It stretched far south to the
low, hazy fells of the Sparrow Downs, and reached long into the north where paler greens gave
over to the great straw-gray expanse of Sulk End. This unbroken pastoral flatness continued all
the way around to the west where, on clearer days, great, distant windmills could be seen, sails
lazily turning. Rossamünd had observed these very mills from the Vestiweg after his escape from
the Hogshead. To the east, the stark, diminishing line of the Wormway ran out from under
Rossamünd's feet. On it went with the merest curve, right through the dark of the Briarywood
and out the other side, on to the ancient, bald hills of the Tumblesloe Heap. There it disappeared
into the mystery of the shadowy cleft of the Roughmarch. Though he had never ventured so far,
Rossamünd knew that over the Tumblesloes the Idlewild began. Normally he might admire the
vista, but this evening it held only threat.
With a heavy sigh, he dutifully followed his comrades.
Down the approach they went, down on to the Pettiwiggin, dark with the chill gloom of
Winstermill's late afternoon shadow. The line of twenty-four lanterns they had to wind began
here, at the bottom of the stonework ramp. Lantern East Winst 1 West Well 24 was the very first
lamp on the Wormway, and as such was treated to special honors, writhen with a confusion of
curls and finials of skillfully wrought iron. It even bore two gretchen-globes at either side of the
main lamp-bell. They were small examples of the phosphorescent pearls formed inside the bellies
of kraulschwimmen, spat out for brave divers to collect from murky seabeds. It was an
ostentatious show of Imperial wealth that such precious items should be used to light this remote
place. It was an equal show of the lamplighters' vigilance that the local banditry had never tried
to steal them. Assimus and Bellicos wound out the bloom, for no prentice was ever allowed to
touch this most prized of lights.
Watching with his fellows, Rossamünd wondered at the strangely lumpy spheres of the
gretchen-globes with their soft, innate radiance, disbelieving that such beauty could come from
the foul innards of some monstrous sea-beast. He looked to Threnody to see if she too was
amazed by these pearlescent lights, but she stood stock-still, arms folded against the cold and all
the world too. On the other side of her, Punthill Plod was nonchalantly inching closer, his rapt
and imperfectly hidden admiration showing he did not share his messmates' ill opinion of her. He
was trying so very hard not to look hopelessly, gormlessly smitten, and doing such a poor job of
it, even Rossamünd could see his intent.
"Things of rare purity, are they not?" came a strange, almost squashed voice behind them.
Rossamünd looked to find Sebastipole there, his face hidden behind its sthenicon, its flat
wooden front looking blankly at the gretchen-globes. The young prentice wondered how the
lights might appear through the bizarre device.
"Aye," he agreed, unsure if the leer remembered him. He spoke low to avoid Grindrod's
attention.
As Assimus and Bellicos did their work, the lamplighter-sergeant was loudly describing the
winding to the prentices, a quick revision he performed at the beginning of every watch.
"I have it on good authority," Sebastipole continued quietly, "that there are whole navies who
use even more marvelous liaphobes than these as sea lights on the backs of their rams."
"Aft-lanterns, sir." Rossamünd could not help giving the correct term. It was as reflexive as a
blink.
"Aft-lanterns?"
"Aye, Mister Sebastipole, aft-lanterns are fixed to the frame through the taffrail at the stern of
a vessel."
Threnody snorted dismissively. "Know-it-all," she muttered. "You sound like an edition of
Lot's Books."
"You remember me, I see." The leer looked pointedly at Rossamünd, passing over
Threnody's aside. "Glad to see you made it to us after all. Bravo. I should know better than to
misname the parts of a ram in the company of a marine-society lad." Even through the strange

sonics of the sthenicon, the leer's humble pleasure at Rossamünd's recognition was obvious.
"Altogether too much lip-flapping happening," Grindrod barked, addressing Rossamünd and
Threnody and conveniently ignoring that Sebastipole outranked him. "Are ye wanting more
impositions, lippy-lucies?"
"No, Lamplighter-Sergeant!"
"Then attend to the winding, lantern-sticks, or ye'll attend a week's worth of the foulest duties
my cunning can devise! Have ye got me?"
"Aye, Lamplighter-Sergeant!"
Grindrod gave Sebastipole a quick and frosty look.
The leer made no comment.
The lantern now glowing, the prentice-watch moved on, each watchman — man and boy —
keeping a full fodicar's length between the next: the correct drill-book formation. The official
wisdom had it that such spacing gave each lighter room to swing his lantern-crook, and the nicker
a harder time attacking more than one lighter at once. This practice went against the natural urge
to bunch together for protection, and Grindrod was continually correcting their gaps as the boys
instinctively drew close to each other. "Step back there, Wheede! Ye want to march behind the
fellow, not take him home to yer mammy! If ye were any closer, Plod, I'd have to separate ye and
Pillow with a chisel!"
It was proving to be a drizzled, windy night. The Harrowmath sounded alive with the hiss
and rush of southerly gusts through its grasses, accompanied by the tuneful buzzing of a rabble of
frogs sending their sweet night music into the gloaming. And with this, along the gap of road
between each lamp, the gritty, crunching unison footfalls of the regular-stepping prentice-watch
added its own even rhythm.
Rossamünd felt safer with Sebastipole at the work tonight. The leer swayed his sthenicon left
and right, left and right, as they moved away from the manse — a thorough, never ceasing
reconnaissance.
At Lantern East Winst 8 West Well 17, Rossamünd was required to wind out the bloom, his
shortened fodicar just barely reaching the ratchet. Twice he tried getting the crank-hook into the
ratchet housing way above him in the crown of the lamp. Twice he failed, the hook end uselessly
hitting the outer bracket of the housing and failing to slot home. Rossamünd had been issued this
shorter lantern-crook in the belief that he could not handle one of full size, yet it had proved
inadequate for the task. Winding out the bloom was one of the hardest skills to learn and a tool
that barely reached the ratchet did not make it any easier.
The other prentices shuffled in the cold and groaned their impatience.
"Thank ye for the wait, Rosey!"
"Master Come-any-later-and-we'll-be-here-till-Chill-ends!"
Even the lampsmen shuffled their feet as they watched and grumbled testily.
"What ails ye, Master Lately?" fumed Sergeant Grindrod. "If ye cannot get the crook in the
hole, then what business have ye being a lighter? Ye boys'll be the end o' me afore I can make ye
fit for lighting!"
Rossamünd could not help but agree. As he was about to fumble a third time, Threnody
stepped up. Her expression dared Grindrod to argue. She took the fodicar in a firm hand and
guided it true. The hook end connected into the ratchet with that pleasant, snug, metal-on-metal
sensation that told it was properly engaged.
"Ah... Thank you, miss," Rossamünd breathed. Shame-faced, he lifted the lantern-crook up
for three ticks of the gears and let it fall under its own weight; lift and let fall — up tow three,
down two three it went, to work the gears that wound out the bloom.
The other prentices were stunned to muteness by Threnody's actions.
Threnody said nothing and stepped away, keeping apart from the other lighters.
"Well, by front door or back, one still gets into the house," Grindrod was clearly amused.
"Wind it out faster, lantern-stick, there's only a set count of hours in a night!'

With much puffing and aching arms, Rossamünd did his duty, the lamp rewarding his effort
with a gradual increasing gleam, and the prentice-watch moved on. Behind them the brooding
safety of Winstermill, with its thousand lamps and window-lights, diminished with every vialimn
lit.
At East Winst 15 West Well 10, Rossamünd fared better with the winding, and at her own
lights Threnody displayed her natural facility, working the ratchet with ease.
The glow of Lantern East Winst 17 West Well 8 on the approach to the Briarywood was
discovered, once it was wound out, to have become a purulent yellow-green. The seltzer water
had been gradually deteriorating.
Time to change the seltzer, just like a bright-limn.
A clothbound record was produced from Bellicos' satchel and the lantern's state recorded for
Wellnigh House's seltzermen to attend to the next day. The wind gathered pace as this was done,
buffeting out from icy storehouses down in the southeast, making ears noisy with its passing and
quieting frog song. On the walk again, Rossamünd twisted and craned his neck to relieve his
hearing from the gusting airs, desperate to catch suspicious, dangerous sounds. Sebastipole kept
at his ceaseless vigilance.
Too soon they reached the Briary, its tops creaking in the wind but at its roots deathly still.
The pyre of nicker corpses was a soggy charred mass that, even after three days, hissed and
steamed with incomplete combustion. Wet woody smells sat heavy in the atmosphere. It was as
if the threwd had worsened, not diminished; that the killing of the horn-ed monsters in the wood
had only stirred that place, not quelled it. Even the hardheaded, stonehearted Grindrod felt the
horrors tonight. The lampsmen hurried the prentices through, insisting upon winding the greatlanterns here themselves to save time and their nerves. At each winding Rossamünd truly
expected Sebastipole to cry out that a nicker was nigh upon them — yet he did not.
With Phoebë lifting her nightly shrinking face over the darkling hills, the prentice-watch
found themselves gratefully passing the great fuming censers of Wellnigh House and entering the
safety of the cothouse confines.
"How was it?" one of the house-watch asked.
"The threwd grows," was Bellicos' curt reply.
"Aye," the house-watchman returned, "don't it always, these days?"

7
Morning To Mourning
burges (noun) small flags for signaling, made in sets of distinct patterns for the representation of letters, numbers,
cardinal points, titles of rank or social elevation, even whole words. The color of a burge is first and foremost for
distinction, though the meaning of the colors can be inferred if a small multistripe, multicolored flag — known as the
parti-jack — is flown with them. Burges are used for both civil and military purposes on land and the vinegar seas.

A

s it had been on their previous prentice-watches, Rossamünd's quarto was rudely
awoken before the sun had properly started its own day. In the hurry of breakfast Rossamünd
thanked Threnody for her help with his lantern-crook.
"I could not help myself," she said a little stiffly. "It is the way of a calendar: strive against
the oppressor, relieve those oppressed, work for those who cannot afford a teratologist's labors,
feed them that cannot afford the food, give roof to the roofless, a bed to the bedless." She spoke
her creed with the monotone of rote learning.
The prentices were blessed with a friendly greeting from Sebastipole as they formed up to
leave, a profound contrast to the surliness of Assimus, Bellicos and Puttinger. The leer at the
lead, out went the lantern-watch, out into the early gray when the air seems especially clear and
still and cheeks hurt with the cold and everyone speaks in a hush; out to quell the lights for the
glory of Ol' Barny once more. Dawning glimmers expanded to an astonishing rosy brilliance as
they returned — as they must — through the Briary's brooding shadows.
Red dawning, traveler's warning...
Even the hard veteran lampsmen kept quiet and looked often to the leer. Rossamünd was sure
he heard suspicious rustlings and rattlings in the winter-barren woods, thick with faintly luminous
fogs, but Sebastipole did not give an alarm.
Out on the raised dike-road of the Harrowmath and free of the claustrophobic thicket, the
prentice-watch walked a little easier. From some hidden roost in the wild pastures the occasional
lonely trilling of a wagtail echoed about the quiet. At lamppost East Winst 5 West Well 20 —
only four more lamps till they could consider themselves safe within the fire arcs of the manse's
great-guns — Grindrod allowed them to take their ease. For a moment they sat on the roadside to
sip at skins of water, chew on hardened slogg-porridge and liten to the tinkle of a runnel that
flowed under the highroad. Called the Dribble, it apparently came from boggy ground to the
north, went through a pipe beneath them in the dike's foundations and down to a small marsh
known as Old Man's Itch in the south. Rossamünd loved its bubbling melody and was grateful
they had stopped by it.
Only Sebastipole did not stand easy, but took a quick drink through a tube stuck into his
sthenicon and resumed his silent survey. Something in the gloom of the Briarywood through
which they had passed only a little more than an hour before seemed to fix his attention. Noticing
the leer's pointed stare, Rossamünd tried to discover what lay there. Surely not a monster? All he
could see was the thick mist condensing up from the grasses and settling over the highroad.
However, he did spy a hard-covered transport emerging from the rising fume. It was a boot truck
pulled by a fully shabraqued mule hurrying as fast along the Pettiwiggin as the fractious creature
could manage.
"First traffic of the day," called Bellicos. "Clear the way!" This was redundant, for all of the
prentice-watch were sitting easy on steep verges.
"He cracks on apace!" spat Assimus.
Though it was still a fair way off, the broad blue and white stripes that covered its windowless
sides could be easily spotted. It was a butcher's wagon; something that belonged in a town or

city.
"He is out of his normal pond," Puttinger mused.
"What business has a butcher got in the early morn on haunted roads?" Bellicos wondered
aloud.
"I reckon I've seen him and his before," Assimus posited. "Comes and leaves from the manse
twice or thrice a year, more frequent yet ever since the old Comptroller-Master-General left."
The approaching vehicle did not distract Sebastipole. He pushed at one of the three small,
slotted levers on the side of his sthenicon and kept staring beyond it, farther down the road. After
a long, far-looking scrutiny, he pushed at the biologue box again from the other side. "We must
hurry ourselves, Lamplighter-Sergeant," the leer said carefully, precisely. "There is a good reason
for that truck's speed: it has picked up a follower."
"At what cardinal, leer?" Grindrod gruffed.
"Directly east."
The lamplighter-sergeant took out his perspective glass, a privilege of his rank, and took in
the view indicated. "Shadows within shadows," he growled obstinately after a thorough scrutiny.
"I see naught to trouble us."
"Yet there is trouble there," Sebastipole persisted patiently. "It remains in the fogs but will
emerge soon enough. You must move now, man! There is an umbergog eagerly on that butcher's
slot!"
An umbergog! Rossamünd was gripped with fascination and dread. Umbergogs were
reputed to be among the largest of the land-walking nickers, some bigger even than ettins and far
more cantankerous and misanthropic. The only ettin he had met had not seemed mean at all,
rather sad and confused. He could see something there, emerging at the edge of clarity, clearly
enormous and coming their way.
"Though our follower is still nigh on two miles distant," Sebastipole said, never moving his
gaze from the distant menace, "it is moving extraordinarily fast. I suggest you pick up the rate —
quickstep or double-quick, Mister Grindrod, and leave off the learning and the dousing till a
friendlier day."
Grindrod bridled, but nevertheless he said, "Aye, leer, good advice—"
"Not again!" quailed Crofton Wheede, too frightened to care that he had interrupted the
lamplighter-sergeant.
"What's the chance of two theroscades within a week?" whimpered Giddian Pillow.
"Steady, lads, steady," Grindrod cautioned. "Ye faced 'em four nights gone and ye'll do it
again today if needs be. Now to yer marching — we'll beat this nasty hugger-mugger home yet!
The basket is still a goodly way that way," he said, pointing open-palmed, soldier fashion, to his
left. "And we have but three parts of a mile to succor and security at the opposite point. Keep yer
dressing and eyes forward if ye want to avoid trouble: a threat near or far should never be
allowed to ruin good and steady order! By the left! At the double-quick, march! "
So they marched fast, Threnody keeping pace with the best of them. Frequently Sebastipole
halted to assess the threat, the lampsmen watching him almost as often, waiting hawklike for his
reaction. Each time he simply spurred the prentice-watch on.
"How is it," Rossamünd heard Puttinger wheeze in his thick Gott accent, "that the basket does
not go for the pile of charbroiled corpses in the Briary?"
"The stinker finds something more to its likin' in the butcher's buggy, I reckon," Bellicos
offered.
The butcher's truck rushed past with a noisy clatter even as the prentices themselves fled. The
driver and the side-armsman were muffled up to the nose against the chill, their eyes unfriendly,
frightened and staring ahead. The donkey was gasping, near blown, but still they pushed it as if
all the blightlings and baskets of the Ichormeer pursued them. In its flight it left a faint unfriendly
trail of moldering meat smells and the faintest whiff of something foul and horrifyingly familiar
— Swine's lard!

A nauseous chill rushed through Rossamünd's innards. He wrestled off the horrors, his
memory lurching back to rever-men slavering in a vessel's dark hold. But here? He cleared his
head with a shake.
"I reckon I recognize 'I'm," Crofton Wheede gasped. "He's the knacker from the woods above
Hinkersiegh where my sires are from. What's 'e doing all the way here?"
Almost immediately a horizontal gout of smoke erupted from the manse followed by the
small thunder of cannon, which sent clouds of startled birds bursting into the gelid morning with a
great clamor from every hide and roost on the Harrowmath. The fortress was firing one of its
long-guns, seeking the prentice-watch's startled attention. Burges were run up beneath Ol' Barny,
small flags lit bright in this clear morning and signaling the same warning Sebastipole had just
issued.
Bellicos pointed to the signal a cried out, "There's a nicker on the Harrowmath!"
Behind, Rossamünd heard Sebastipole say, as if to himself, "As I said..."
"So yer prescient observation shows true, leer. Well done to ye." The lamplighter-sergeant
did not actually sound pleased or impressed.
The prentices kept bravely at their marching, but began to look about wildly, losing what was
left of their even gait, quickly ceasing to step-regular altogether. Rossamünd stepped directly into
Tremendus Twörp's broad back, receiving a blow to his chin and nose from the lad's flabby
shoulder blade. Threnody managed to gracefully avoid the collision.
"Reform yer file, ye clod-footed blunderers!" Grindrod barked angrily. He looked back.
"Where is the beast?" He looked again through his glass and must have found something, for he
said, "What an ugly article..." With a grunt, Grindrod passed the perspective glass to Bellicos.
With eight hundred yards still between them and Winstermill's sturdy gates, some hulking
thing was emerging from the fog. It had gained on them alarmingly. Even at a distance
Rossamünd could see its giant size: a lumbering brute with a great spread of spikes about its
head. And how fast its massive legs did carry it! Even as they watched it seemed to draw closer.
"I reckon it's the Herdebog Trought!" wheezed Bellicos with the cautious calm of a hardened
campaigner. "Even from here I can recognize the basket. I remember it from its rampagings in
'87."
"Can't be!" muttered Assimus. "It's meant to have been chased by the Columbines all the way
up into the northern marches of the Gluepot and destroyed there."
"It's coming! " Wheede shrieked.
The other prentices whimpered.
"I don’t want to die by the jaws of a nicker..." burbled Twörp.
"Cease yer panicking!" Lamplighter-Sergeant Grindrod bellowed. "I've been in far tighter
contests than this."
"Grindrod!" Sebastipole barked, surprisingly clear from his boxed face. "With Puttinger, take
the prentices back to the manse as quickly as you think they can stand. Assimus and Bellicos and
I shall be rear guard. Go now, Lamplighter-Sergeant — there's not a moment to lose!"
The lamplighter-sergeant repeated the orders as if they were his own. The prentices hurried
away; the double pace doubled again, leaving Sebastipole and the two lampsmen to do what they
might to put the beast off. At East Winst 3 West Well 22 the prentices paused, panting like
overworked dogs. Rossamünd looked back, and his eyes went saucerlike.
The umbergog was bearing down at a prodigious speed now, pulling itself along with the
assistance of its long powerful arms. Less than two lantern-spans were between it and the rear
guard. Half as tall again as the ettin Rossamünd had met in the Brindleshaws, this nicker was like
some enormous malformed deer, its great antlers spreading out above its head like a regiment of
pikes. Its hide, knotted and matted in thick curling beards about its chin, throat and down its
chest, was like clots of dirty pale brown felt. The black fur about its small, weeping, rage-red
eyes radiated down its cheek like points on a wind rose. It gave vent to a bellow like the lowing
of a mighty, maniac bull, its hot breath expelled into the cold as billows of yellow steam.

"At the doubled-double now. Lead on, Mister Puttinger." Grindrod hung back. "I'll keep an
eye out rearward."
The prentices hustled forward, barely held panic spurring them. The thump of a long-gun
pounded ahead of them, and the metal it threw flew close enough for Rossamünd to hear its
unnerving, shuddering whine. The gunners of the fortress clearly thought the beast close enough
to try their aim. The shot struck the earth to the north of the road, tearing a gap in the weeds and
sending up a small spray of root-clogged soil well to the right of the charging monster.
Assimus, Bellicos and Sebastipole each discharged their locks though they were well out of
range, then retreated at a run.
"Mister Puttinger, take the boys on," Grindrod ordered. "I will stay to aid the rear guard."
"Yes, Lamplighter-Sergeant!" the old lampsman cried obediently.
Threnody made to hold back too as Grindrod dropped behind; she was fearless and clearly
itching to do her part.
"Keep up, girly!" Puttinger hollered with quick fury, and grudgingly she picked up her pace
again.
The prentices were running now in line, a maneuver for which they had had little training.
Soon their formation was only a ragged farce of a file. Yet what they lacked in skill they
compensated for in speed. Straggling, struggling to breathe, they were near enough to the fortress
now to hear the terrible, distant baying of the manse's dogs lusting to be let at the mighty beast.
With this came the distant clattering of alarm posts tumbled out on drums, and the dong-dongdong of the warning bell hung high in the Specular, the bell tower of the southern gatehouse. Yet
as close as they were, Rossamünd doubted they could reach the manse in time. The battlements
buzzed and milled with agitation as little, far-off people called encouragement from the walls.
"Leg it, lads! Leg it!"
Soldiers began firing from the ramparts, their muskets cracking hot but doing little more than
fouling the air with their fumes. A few spent balls thwipped through the tangled grasses on either
side of the road, posing more danger to the boys than the beast, and the ragged shooting soon
stopped.
Ahead of them the butcher's truck kept at its cracking pace, the winded donkey whipped to
push beyond all endurance. It neared the Approach and the succor of Winstermill, and
Rossamünd bitterly wished he was upon it; yet instead of going up the steep ramp, the truck
clattered on to disappear into the Bowels beneath the fortress.
At the head of the prentices' line, Crofton Wheede stumbled as the road changed from tamped
clay to pavers of dressed stone. He tripped out of file, dragging Giddian Pillow with him. The
other prentices avoided the tumble, but Rossamünd proved less nimble. Wheede's toppling
fodicar caught him about the shin and pulled him down. He saw a glimpse of gray sky and
whirling horizon and hit the ground with a lazy puff of fine road-dust, his hat spinning off into the
Harrowmath grass. A deft roll and Rossamünd was up on his feet again looking east, then west,
then east again. Threnody slowed, this time to help him, fright now clear on her face, but the
other prentices ran on, screaming panicked encouragements over their shoulders. Wheede and
Pillow scrabbled to their feet and were off like hares from a covert, pelting after the others
without a rearward look, deserting fodicars, fusils, knapsacks, even a mess-kid in their renewed
flight. Red-faced and gasping, Puttinger half-turned but, seeing the lads back on their feet,
continued his own retreat.
With quick glances left and right, Rossamünd could see that he was not going to get away.
None of them were: not Sebastipole nor Grindrod nor the lampsmen dashing after them, not even
Puttinger and the fleeing prentices. Only the butcher's truck was safe — the very one that had
brought this terror. Surely there was something he could do other than run uselessly? Surely he
could attempt something to help his fellows escape?
From his salt-bag he took out one of two leakvanes he carried. The small box contain two
scripts separated by a heavy film of treated velvet. When mixed these burst into a repellent of the

foulest kind. He had never used a leakvane, nor even seen one till he joined the lighters, and
under less testing circumstances might have hesitated to try it. Yet, with carelessness born of
necessity, Rossamünd pulled the red velvet tab that kept the two volatiles apart and hurled the box
as far as he could — a surprising way for so small a lad. The leakvane landed with a skipping
bounce on the Pettiwiggin, falling between him and the retreating lampsmen. Rossamünd had no
idea how long it would take for the chemistry to erupt from it and only hoped it would not go off
till after the men had passed over.
The guns of Winstermill spoke again, five deep, rippling coughs, booming so close in
succession they were almost one sound. The distinct and frightening how of twenty-four-pounder
cannon shot came high and to the right. Three shots went well wide. One glanced off the
umbergog's right arm to ricochet crazily into the Harrowmath hay. The last was a direct hit. It
struck squarely in the monster's ribs with a thick, dull slap, forcing a coughing belch from the
Trought. The creature's flesh rippled violently under the blow, but the shot did not penetrate and
dropped uselessly to the road. The umbergog staggered and bellowed at the buzzing walls of
Winstermill. A thin cheer of many smaller voices answered it faintly from the battlements.
Before the beast the four men of the rear guard fled, and as they ran the leakvane burst
prematurely ahead of them with a hissing pop. Too soon it sent out a foul, warding steam, a
smoking hedge that hung between Rossamünd and the senior lighters. They waved their arms
angrily and the prentice could hear Grindrod's indignation carry on the wind.
"What are ye doing, ye twice-stunted ape!" he roared. "Are ye trying to trap and kill us?"
The leer leaped through the repellent and, following his lead, Bellicos darted about the side of
the boiling smoke. So encouraged, Assimus and the lamplighter-sergeant hastily followed.
The fortress guns boomed a third time. The tearing shriek of their shots quickly followed.
With surprising and terrifying dexterity the beast ducked their fire and sprang forward,
leaping nearly one hundred yards, as Rossamünd could tell it, in that single bound.
"Run!" Sebastipole commanded. "Perhaps your chemistry will purchase us a little space!"
Puttinger and the prentices were near Winstermill's precipitate ramp; perhaps they would be
safe after all? Rossamünd could only wish he were among them.
The umbergog was closing. Only a single lantern-span and the clouds of leakvane repellent
stood between. The young prentice was sure he could feel its powerful footfalls through the
paving of the Pettiwiggin, yet when he dared a rearward look the creature had slowed. The
smoke of the leakvane had been spread about by contrary breezes, and the reek boiled broadly
over the road, going down either side of the dike and into the thick weeds. The Trought was
obviously confounded and pulled short stupidly, turning its dripping nose up at the fume. So
close and so tall was the creature that it eclipsed the rising sun.
The leer, the prentice and the three lighters ran. They had not gone far when Rossamünd
realized with horror that somehow Threnody was still behind them, making a stand before the
hefty beast. Even now she took careful aim at the giant with her fusil while it sniffed bemusedly
at the leakvane's brume. Realizing what Threnody was doing, Sebastipole pulled up and turned,
unshouldering, cocking and sighting his long-rifle in a single, easy action.
Hiss-CRACK! went Threnody's fusil, its gun-smoke acrid, the sound of Sebastipole's own
fire quickly following.
One of the shots was true, It struck the umbergog just as the brute was daring to push through
the broiling barrier of repellent. The monster gave a mighty yelp far out of proportion with the
smallness of the hit and staggered back, cracking the paving with its footfall and sending up a
spray of gravel and dust.
Such was the sting of skold-shot.
With gloved hands, the leer instantly took another skold-shot ball from a cartridge box hung
over his shoulder and, quick and cool, reloaded his long-barreled firelock.
Ahead of them Threnody did the same.
"I would appreciate it if you would come away now, m'dear," Sebastipole called to her, but

she did not acknowledge.
The nicker, its abdomen now splattered with new-flowing gore, bounded at them, head up,
mouth gaping, its ponderously oversized antlers pointing wide along its back. Rossamünd could
feel the pounding of it mighty strides shaking the road beneath his feet.
Undaunted, both Threnody and Sebastipole coolly fired again.
Hisss-C-CRACK! No more than a hundred yards from the, a gout of ichor came from the top
of the umbergog's head, a piece of shattered antler spun off. A prodigious shot, whosoever it was.
The beast cried its agony again as it was sent headlong, sprawling upon its knees across the road
and sliding down into the Harrowmath.
Sebastipole, seeing Rossamünd, called, "if you have another of those leakvane boxes, I
suggest you employ it now — we could do with the help, I think."
Rossamünd quickly produced the second leakvane from his salumanticum. He pulled its red
velvet tab, gave it a brisk shake and tossed the little box a short way up the road.
"Now, let us be off!" Sebastipole cried.
The Herdebog Trought was getting to its feet again, pulling itself up by those powerful arms,
coughing and snuffling and shaking its great, bloodied head.
As they ran, Sebastipole put himself between the monster and the two prentices.
Rossamünd fossicked about in his salt-bag for a dose of Frazzard's powder. He did not know
how it might work on a nicker so big, but some potive in hand, however inadequate, felt far better
than none. He looked back over his shoulder.
Half standing, the Herdebog Trought peered at Rossamünd, Threnody and the valiant leer as
if seeing them for the first time, then at the fleeing lamplighters, almost to the Approach now,
almost home. It seemed puzzled, sniffing once more at the air, stooping to smell the ground and
casting about confusedly. Rossamünd did not get the same sense of pure malignancy from this
creature as he did from the horn-ed nickers. The umbergog felt driven more by anger than
malice.
The second leakvane burst at last with a whoof! of toxic smoke. Giving a wild bovine shout,
the startled monster leaped up and over them, passing close overhead. With a great shudder of
the ground and cracking of flagstones it landed on the opposite side of their small group. By
some cause of Providence, the Herdebog Trought had let them be. It lumbered away down the
Pettiwiggin, covering a prodigious distance even as Rossamünd watched, its attention fixed on the
tunnel-mouth into which the butcher's van had fled.
Grindrod and the two lampsmen were close to the fortress now. They had caught up with the
prentices, who were struggling to make the last few dozen yards. The nicker was gaining on them
all. The musketry resumed on the walls. Puffs of dirt flicked up as balls missed or deflected from
the monster's shaggy hide.
Rossamünd could just see Bellicos turn and stand his ground. He cried something over his
shoulder and flourished a pistol. There was a tiny puff of thick white from his hand and a pathetic
pop of pistol shot.
The nicker hesitated. It must have been hit.
But one shot form such a sidearm, skold-shot or otherwise, could never stop such a gargant —
not even Sebastipole or Threnody's fine aim had managed that — and the beast recovered in an
instant.
Sebastipole loaded and fired his long-rifle as quick as he might in support of the lampsman,
scoring a glancing hit on the monster's rump, a fine shot that did naught to stop it.
Wailing "No!" Rossamünd watched helpless as the Trought galloped forward and caught up
Bellicos in its gangling violence, crumpling and crushing the fellow as it ran on, flinging what
remained to the eight winds. A cry of indignant dismay came from the watchers on the wall.
Bravely the fellow had stood and bravely he had fallen, gaining a precious little space for his
comrades.
With Grindrod, the two remaining lighters and the prentices still on the road, the umbergog

was upon them. Yet just as it had disregarded Sebastipole, Threnody and Rossamünd, the nicker
ignored the prentice-watch too as the scattered either side of the conduit into the concealing
weeds below. The beast stayed fixed on the Bowels and, ignoring all the firelocks firing,
lumbered right up to the great gap in the foundations. The trought was too big to fit within, and
reached into the tunnel with its great arms, bellowing into the cavity in rage. There was a
clamorous ring of metal as the ponderous grille was let to drop on the umberbog's questing limb.
Roaring, clearly wounded in head and body, the beast wrenched free of the pinning portcullis.
The yowling of the dogs became louder as the heavy bronze portals of Winstermill were
swung open to release a company of troubardiers, the manse's entire complement. They were led
by Josclin, the lighter's only scourge. His entire head was wrapped with protective bandages of
potive-treated fascins. The soldiers with him stepped high and stoutly, going out to defend their
brothers, long spittendes — barbed, cross-pieced pikes — ready in their hands, their boots
clattering on the dressed stone of the Approach.
Another was with them, wrapped in a cloak of orange, blue and white. It was the lady
Dolours, without her wings, her bald head wrapped in a soft cap. Standing on the edge of the
ramp and looking down on the Trought, she raised a hand to her forehead. Rossamünd suddenly
feared for the Trought's life: regardless of poor Bellicos, he was sure the beast did not deserve
such an end. Fully expecting the poor Trought to expire instantly, he was amazed when the
hugeous thing stumbled away from the fortress, slipping down the side of the highroad dike.
Why does she not kill it?
Rossamünd could see Plod and Wheede huddled on the same side of the road, frozen in
confusion, wailing their fright. Close by, the Trought, equally distressed, collapsed to its
haunches in the grass of the Harrowmath, steam rising from the heaving back into the morning
cold.
The troubardiers pressed forward with a derisive yell. Spittendes lowered in bristling threat,
they formed on the road with dangerous alacrity. The scourge stepped before them, standing on
the verge, twirling a sling filled with some deadly potive. Ten yards from the panting beast he
gave a shout and flung his chemistry. The nicker raised an arm to ward off the hissing projectile,
and the potive struck it with a dirty splash. The Trought recoiled screaming as part of its forearm
was dissolving to the bone. Even its ponderous mass was not enough to save it from the ancient
script.
The troubardiers charged down the side of the dike with a battle-yell, joined by the
yammering dogs led by their handlers from the gate, and by the jeers of the lighters on the wall.
Threnody shouted with them, thrilling to the hope of victory soon won, thrilling to the hope of
revenge. Rossamünd just watched, not knowing who to feel sad for: man or beast.
At last the monster half turned and staggered to its feet for several heavy steps, then made off
into the long grass of the Harrowmath. With pestilential steam streaming from the bubbling
stump of its left arm it fled north, faster than the heavy pediteers could follow. The dogs were let
go at last, great black tykehounds dashing out from the fortress and down the Approach, past the
ranks of the troubardiers, to chase the wounded creature down and hold it at bay. Cheers grew
louder, great hoots of victory from the men on the walls, many shouting the lead dog's names.
"Fly, Drüker!"
"At 'em, Griffstutzig!"
"Get the masher, boys!"
The troubardiers halted at the base of the dike and gave voice to another cry as the Herdebog
Trought quit the scene.
In the awful silence that followed, Rossamünd retrieved his hat from the southern slope of the
highroad. Torn between his grief for Bellicos and for the Trought, he joined Threnody and
Sebastipole as they returned hastily to the manse. For much of the way no one said anything, the
prentice hugging himself as his awareness of the cold returned.
"Will they kill it, sir?" he asked in a small voice.

"Most certainly," Sebastipole returned. "The brute has killed one of our own and must be
slain in turn."
Kill or be killed, went Rossamünd's thoughts. "Oh," he said aloud. "That was some frank
shooting, sir," he ventured after a lengthy silence. He said the words with said yet genuine
admiration, trying hard to ignore the red stains of Bellicos' pointless ruin on the road. "And you
too, miss," he said to Threnody.
Flushed, staring out toward the far-off, fleeing umbergog, Threnody had said nothing since
her valiant stand. She now gave a zealous, self-satisfied smile. "I just wish it had been doglocks
in my hands and not a fusil," she said warmly.
In his turn the leer bowed his head in thanks for Rossamünd's compliment. "Improved aim is
one of the genuine boons of this vile biologue," Sebastipole said mildly as he removed his
sthenicon with a sucking intake of breath. For several beats the leer seemed as if he had been
struck a heavy blow, slowing his pace, dazed and blinking rapidly. "But you, young woman, have
clearly got a fine eye," he finally continued, still giving his head small, violent shakes. The
sthenicon was returned to its ordinary-looking box, and a kerchief produced into which
Sebastipole blew his nose over and over. "And I thank you both for standing stoutly with me
through it." He acknowledged them both with an admiring nod and Threnody smiled again,
clearly thinking she could now take her place among the men.
Rossamünd did not feel so confident. "I am so sorry for the leak vane bursting too quick, sir.
It was—"
"Not another thought, young sir!" Sebastipole insisted. "It was well intended and did its trick
in the end. Tarbinaires like those leakvanes of yours are contraptions even in the wisest hands."
Dolours came down to them as they walked up the Approach, full of concern for her
mistress's daughter. She went to wrap an arm around Threnody, but the girl bristled and with an
angry sound refused the bane's comfort. Dolours looked to the heavens for a moment and
followed.
Within the manse's fortified bosom, they found Grindrod and the prentice-watch gathered safe
at last, formed up on Evolution Square as if they had just returned from a typical lantern-dousing.
Every boy looked exhausted, harrowed; most bore tear stains on their cheeks. Crofton Wheede
still wept even as he tried to hide it.
The lamplighter-sergeant was doing his best to console the traumatized boys. "Well, ye lads
have surely had a violent passage through yer prenticing..." It was with almost obvious relief that
he turned his attention to Rossamünd. "As for ye, Master Come-lately, ye're a fool of fools, boy!
I'll have yer gizzards for gaiter straps for putting yer vile puffings in our way! I thought it was the
end of me! Of all the sponge-headed bedizened... Were you trying to kill us all?"
"That will be enough, sergeant-lighter," Sebastipole warned, becoming very grave. "You
know very well the placing of the leakvane was intended only to deter the nicker and give us a
screen to retreat behind."
"I'll remind ye, Sebastipole," Grindrod said, leaning into the leer's face, "that the prentices are
my charge—"
"And I'll remind you, Grindrod, that both you and they are mine," returned the lamplighter's
agent, stepping to a grateful Rossamünd's side.
Grindrod stared at Sebastipole and then changed his tack. "Fine bit of marksmanship, leer,"
he said. "Almost as good as the girl."
Sebastipole simply blew his nose and turned his attention to Rossamünd. He gave the
prentice an owlish look. "It has been a pleasure to serve with you, young master Rossamünd."
He smiled politely. "I go to join the inevitable coursing party. We will trap it and so bring its
end. Thank you again for your assistance, sir." He looked over at Threnody, who stood silent on
the edge of the group, unsure how to join in. "And you, young woman. I would happily have
either of you at my side on any future outing."
Rossamünd was even more confounded. This was high praise, but it left him terribly

troubled. What part had he played in what was to be the Trought's ineluctable end? The killing
of the horn-ed nickers had seemed right, necessary, but the Trought's destruction brought only
baffled dismay. Indeed, Rossamünd felt most angry at the butchers, for baiting the beast. Was it
really swine's lard I smelled?
Threnody did not answer either, but stood with arms folded and chin raised.
Mister Sebastipole was quickly away, clearly intent on joining the group that was forming by
the gate, eager to hunt the nicker that had just slain one of their own. The clamor of the
tykehounds could still be heard coming distantly from the Harrowmath.
Grindrod bent right down into Rossamünd's face. "Ye, sir, will never make it to lampsman if
ye get in the way of yer fellow lighters and near cause their deaths."
Rossamünd fumed silently. He had done all he could to protect and defend his fellows.
Mister Sebastipole had said he had done rightly; he would not back down. Nevertheless, he was
wise enough to not speak. He knew what little good it would do him.
"Ye can forget yer Domesday vigil tomorrow, lantern-stick!" the lamplighter-sergeant hissed.
"Pots-and-pans for ye all day. Think yerself well off, for I would cheerfully make it worse!"

8
Pots-And-Pans
evolutions training in the correct movements in marching and the right handling of weapons and other equipment.
Evolutions are taken very seriously in military organs, especially in armies, where pediteers are drilled over and over
and over in all the marches and skills required until they become a habit. Failure to perform evolutions successfully
is punished, sometimes severely, and this is usually enough to scare people into excellence.

T

he coursing party that finally left by the middle of that very same day was constituted of
the scourge Josclin and another skold Rossamünd had never met before, Clement, Sebastipole, a
quarto of lurksmen, a platoon of ambuscadiers and musketeers, the tractors of the dogs, and two
mules with their muleteers to bear comestibles. No one thought the coursers would be gone long,
and everyone expected them to return victorious.
Dolours had not joined in the course, which Rossamünd thought strange given her venturing
out to help fight the Trought. "Not well enough to travel," he overheard the bane say in a brief
word with Threnody.
Bellicos' death was a heavy blow to everyone at Winstermill. He might have been a worldweary veteran pensioned off, so to speak, along the safest stretch of the way, but he was one of
their own. Reports of lighters from other parts of the highroad coming to their end were common
enough, but this was the first lighter from the manse to be killed in a long while. Ol' Barny was
flown at half mast, and the lighters, pediteers, servants and even the clerks wore long faces and
did their duty perfunctorily.
At times, and more so at middens, the other prentices — those who had been safely in
Winstermill washing and breakfasting and marching while their fellows were fleeing the
umbergog — nagged those of Q Hesiod Gæta to recount every particular of their flight. Their
own deaths so nearly realized that morning, those of Rossamünd's quarto were unwilling to
endlessly repeat their small parts in the rampaging of the Trought. Deeply shocked, they had no
heart for the usual showing away and idle brags, but sat together in the mess hall in a melancholy
huddle. Threnody would not sit with them, but stayed very near, cleaning her fusil ostentatiously.
Unsatisfied, their fellows diverted themselves, wondering what the coursing party might do to the
creature, wandering off to ignorant conjectures about whether Clement or Sebastipole or
Laudibus Pile was the best leer.
Did you see how the basket tried to get into the Bowels?" Crofton Wheede wondered quietly,
his haunted gaze looking at nothing. "I thought he was after us, but he was set fast on that meat
cart."
"Maybe they were baiting it," Smellgrove offered in a whisper.
"They looked too frightened for that," countered Pillow.
"Exactly," said Threnody from outside the circle. "Besides, who'd be simple-headed enough
to bait an umbergog?"
"Me dead dad," Wrangle muttered, flashing a look of suppressed fury at the girl.
"Maybe they were delivering parts for the dark trades," Rossamünd spoke up, thinking of the
hint of swine's lard he had detected.
That struck the others dumb.
"Carry for the dark trades right under our noses?" Smellgrove snorted.
Rossamünd shrugged. "I've seen some bad fellows try to get a rever-man through the Spindle.
It's not impossible."
His fellow prentices looked at him oddly and lapsed into ruminative silence.
Soon the mood of the Hesiod Gæta prentices affected the whole platoon, and a heavy

glumness settled on them all.
For Rossamünd, the sorrow of the lampsman's passing and the Trought's imminent destruction
was far bleaker than that he had reckoned upon. In a few months he had seen so much death —
violent and stark and shocking quick — nothing like the glorious end that his pamphlets described
for its heroes. The life of adventure was a life of violence. He had been seeking this, but now
found he did not want it; men died, monsters died, and only grief and self-doubt remained.
Barely eating his skilly and ignoring all about him, the young prentice felt a light touch on his
shoulder. It was Threnody, looking at him with guarded and unexpected sympathy, perhaps to
show that she understood. Rossamünd was not sure anyone could. Who else was able to
comprehend sadness for the slaughter of a monster?
Grindrod was determined not to let the boys wallow in the aftermath. They were set to
marching, stepping-regular across the Grand Mead and back, across and back, left, right, left... for
what remained of that grief-struck day. "Good practicing for tomorrow morning's pageant-ofarms," as the lamplighter-sergeant put it. However, Grindrod was himself more irascible than
usual, and bawled out even the slightest error. "Keep to yer dressing, ye splashing salamanders!
I didn't stand out here hollering at ye for more than two months to witness this clod-footed
display! Step-regular like I have showed ye! Swift and even!"
The Lamplighter-Marshal visited the prentices at mains. He told them that he had halted the
prentice-watch once more, and spoke quietly to each member of Q Hesiod Gæta. "It is a hard
thing to lose a brother-in-arms, Prentice Bookchild," the Marshal said gently, pale eyes genuine in
their commiseration. Grieve freely, and remember well why it is we stand here against the
wicked foe."
But what if the foe is one only because we make him so? Rossamünd quashed the troubling
thought.
"Lamplighter-Marshal, sir?" piped Smellgrove. "What happened to that butcher's wagon?"
The Marshal smiled. "Ah, those fellows hid scared in the Bowels till middens then went
down the Gainway, very anxious to be gone — not like ye stout gents standing afore the front of
stiffest dangers!" He looked at all the prentices with fatherly esteem. "Bravely done, my boys,
bravely done!"
Every face, whether it had suffered trauma that day or not, beamed at him.
A double tot of grog was given out as a treat that night, an especial consideration to the boys
who had suffered that morning. They all drank openly in memorial to Bellicos, and the eight
quietly in thankfulness for their own survival.
"A confusion on the nickers!" Arabis boisterously cried the habitual toast.
It was repeated lustily by all but Rossamünd, who barely murmured, "A confusion on the
nickers," and then mouthed, and an end to my own.
Mains came to its end and evenstalls began. While the other prentices, Threnody with them,
went to their confines to polish and prepare for tomorrow's full parade, Rossamünd was required
to present himself at the kitchen for his scullery punishment. He was given no dispensation for
the terrible attack of the Trought. Exhausted, he stowed his hat, frock coat and weskit safely in
his cell, put on a smock issued to all prentices for laboring duties, then hurried out.
Only four sharp turns from the prentices' mess hall were the enormous kitchens with their
sweating, white daubed walls and high ceilings of intersecting smoke- and fat-blackened beams.
Cookhouse, buttery, small-mill, scullery and slaughter yard were together run by the culinaire, a
woman infamously known as the Snooks . She was stout and lumpy and not much taller than
Rossamünd, dressed in gray, with a puckered perspiring face, its age hidden beneath a trowel's
worth of boudoir cream. Worse, her lips and jowls were pinked with rouge, making her look like
an ancient kind of good-day gala-girl, such as those Rossamünd had passed in less seemly parts
of Boschenberg.
A near-mythic fear of her made pots-and-pans an excellent punishment for defaulting
prentices. From her throne at the end of a long-scarred bench the Snooks glowered at Rossamünd

through thick double spectacles as he entered the steam, stink and sweat.
"Hark 'ee, another weedy lantern-stick sent by old Grind-yer-bones to do me dishes!" she
cried at him above the clangor of chopping knives and stirring ladles. "Ye lads come to me so
often I don't have any labors for me scullery maids to work," she added with a chuckle, a
strangled wheezing gurgle.
Rossamünd swallowed a gasp at the sharp, distinctly unpleasant odor of the kitchens. He had
expected they would always smell sweet, of baking crusts and roasting sides: where Mother
Snooks sat reeked more of fat and some acrid cleaning paste. "I've come for pots-and-pans."
"Yes, yes, I know that!" the Snooks snapped. "It's the only reason ye bantlings come to me."
She squinted at him through fogging glasses, her lips pursing and puckering over and over. She
took out a small, well-thumbed tally book and flipped many pages. "Let us spy on who we've got
ourselves here," she muttered, running a stubby finger as if down a list. "Ninth of Pulvis... ninth
of... Ah! Here he be! Ye pasty li'l sugarloaf," she stated in small triumph, then looked hard and
close at the page. "Oh." She gave Rossamünd a quizzing look. "Ye're not the new girl, are ye?"
"Ah... No, ma'am." Then it occurred to him what she meant. A little glimmer of self-respect
expired within. "I... I just have a — a girl's name."
The Snooks gave a strange, high snort and her gurgling forgery of a laugh. "Well, perhaps we
should find ye a pretty pinafore to wear!" This made her laugh even harder.
Rossamünd stood stiffly and waited for her to stop.
She wagged her head and dabbed at an oily tear. "The burdens some of us have to bear, eh?"
she signed. She marked the tally book with the greasy stub-end of a pencil and put the book away
somewhere in her apron. Pointing into the confusion of the cries and the cooking she instructed
him, "Off ye go — scullery's through there and down yon stairs. Philosotrata is always ready for
the help."
Rossamünd rolled up the sleeves of his smock and made his way through the bustling kitchen.
He passed the small-mill, where the pistor ground and pounded the flour in a granite mortar ready
for hasty pudding, the little treat allowed the prentices on Domesdays. His stomach gurgled.
Some might have said it was bland stuff, hasty pudding, but as an interruption to the repetitive
menu, it was a small ladling of bliss. Rossamünd stepped aside as the furner stoked the ten-door
oven that dominated the center of the great room, bumping into one of the baxters as she prodded
and checked her baking breads.
"Oi there, pip-squeak," the Baxter warned. "Best mind yourself, afore you wind up in one of
me loaves!"
At last in the farther corner he found an oblong hole in the floor through which steam was
continuously venting in churning swirls. The scullery cellar. Paved steps went down and
Rossamünd descended till he was standing by a line of scrubbers, great wooden vats brimful of
frothy, near-scalding water. The rosy-faced scullery maids, arms up to elbows in suds, greeted
him with singsong cheer. The head scullery maid, Philostrata, handed him a soap-greasy cloth.
"Sooner to start is sooner to end." She pointed with a nod to a tub crowded about with unsteady
piles of grimed crockery and smeared turnery.
Vinegar flies floated about the stack delicately.
Pots-and-pans!
The water was tremendously hot, but when Rossamünd flinched, the nearest scullery maid
chided him gently. "Don't be a mewling great babbie, now." She smiled. "You'll get used to the
scald. Young lantern-sticks need to grow into hardy lighters."
Rossamünd washed pots, pans, plates, griddles, saucers, fine Gomroon porcelain, dainty Heil
glassware, sturdy mugs, cutlery and turnery. Sweat dripped form his brow and soaked his shirt as
he scrubbed away the grease and washed off the spittles and scraps. The water turned into a foul,
tepid soup that was promptly replaced with steaming new water poured from large coppers and
made sudsy with great scoops of scarlet-powder. Scullery hands bustled about taking washed
plates, drying them, hustling them off to be stored.

As the scullery maids worked they gossiped and griped. "...Did you see what she upstairs had
delivered today?" one woman huffed with a ceilingward glance and a dripping poke of her thumb
in the vague direction of the Snooks. "We only used to get the finest, but now she rules the roost.
Acacia says she carts in this awful cheap wheat dust from Doggenbrass! She ought to know
better!"
"Tut!" another maid exclaimed. "The finest fields in the Sundergird just north of us, and she's
importing poor stuffs from across the Grume! All because of that pinch-a-goose, Odious
Podious."
"Larks! Been her but three years and it's like he rules the place!"
"Or like he wants to," came the first scullery maid's shrewd answer.
"Mm-hmm," her colleagues-in-suds agreed.
Rossamünd washed for an hour, his puckered hands becoming insensible to the steaming
water, and was relieved when Philostrata told him that his job was done and he could leave.
Feeling a weight lifted, he hurried up the scullery steps eager for the seclusion of his cell.
His joy was premature.
Finding the happy prentice without a task and ready to leave, the Snooks put a heavy arm
about Rossamünd and guided him over to an enormous fireplace filled with chains and lumpish
levers. The pendulous fat of her limb flowed about either side of his neck. Rossamünd strained
his head away from the noxious mixing of her posy-perfume and the funk of her armpits. Before
him was a great cauldron, removed from its hooks over the hearth.
"Now I want ye to hop into there," the Snooks said, pointing to the enormous pot, "and scrub
away till it all gleams."
The young prentice regarded the cauldron with sinking, wide-eyed disgust. With a helping
hoist up and over from a soup cook, he was made to climb inside, and to his horror the pot was
still warm from its cooking. He was expected to scratch at the crust of ages within with little
more than a bent butter knife and an old brush. Squashed on his knees, Rossamünd labored in
dread of being forgotten and having some boiling, putrid fish-head stew poured atop him.
Hacking at the crust with the handle of the brush, he had managed to make a fair pile of burn
smithereens at the bottom of the great pot when he felt it being lifted and saw the stone mantel of
the fireplace loom over the rim to eclipse the smoke-stained white ceiling. They were going to
boil him!
"Ahoy! Ahoy there! I'm in here!" he hollered. "I'm in here!"
The cauldron was tipped on its side and Rossamünd rolled on to the slate-paved floor. Small
unidentifiable pieces of char stuck to his face, hands and clothes.
"I'm sure ye're very tasty, me lad," the soup cook grinned, "though I reckon yer boots might
make for some prodigious chewing."
Shaking just a little, Rossamünd grinned with him. Brushing off the char, he presented
himself back at the Snooks' chair. The kitchen was beginning to empty now, staff retiring for the
night as their duties finished, and Rossamünd was hopeful he would be among them.
Regarding him through light-reflecting lenses, the Snooks pursed and unpursed her lips.
"What to do with ye now, eh?" she muttered. "What to do with ye now... I tell ye what, boyo,"
the old potato sack of a woman offered at last, "I need ye to do a little favor for yer old Mother
Snooks. What do ye say?"
"W-What would I have to do, ma'am?"
"Why, just carry a trifling thing up some stairs for me, that is all."
"I... er..." Rossamünd started.
"Or shall I tell dear old Grind-yer-bones just how contrary ye are? I'd be happy to give ye a
more regular place in me kitchen." The Snooks gave him an appraising look.
Rossamünd made a strangled noise.
"I'll take that to be a 'yes,' shall I?" The culinaire grinned wickedly. "Good lantern-stick."
With that she took him back through the cookhouse and out into a small quadrangle that he

never knew existed. It was sunk right down like a well amid the lofty walls of Winstermill and
was lit dimly by the light showing from the kitchen door and slit windows. Stars showed through
the high oblong hole above, blue Gethsemanë — the brightest — winking at him silently. In the
twilight Rossamünd could tell the place was both manger and slaughterhouse, the stink of pig's
sweat, lanolin, dung and blood mixing with the smoke of a fitfully glowing brazier. By it a man
stood, warming his hands, clearly oblivious to the stink. He wore a striped apron and a belt
holding wicked-looking carvers — a slaughterman.
The Snooks went to him. "Well, hello there, Slarks," she said in her friendliest voice. "Give
my parel to the lad."
"Right you are, Mother Snooks." Slarks hesitated, looked dubiously at Rossamünd from
crown to boot-toe and then went to fetch this "parcel." With a grunt he hefted a sack and handed
it straight to the young prentice. "Watch out, lad — it might be a mite weighty for you!"
Rossamünd grappeled with it clumsily, expecting to be toppled by a ponderous weight. It
smelled strongly of pigs and made vile squished noises, but it was not heavy.
The slaughterman regarded Rossamünd. "You're a wiry little stick, ain't you?" He indicated
the sack with a wink. "We won't be havin' the soup this week, eh?"
Rossamünd had not notion o f what he meant.
"Follow me, me darling dumb-muscle, follow me!" The Snooks led the way back through the
kitchen, past the mill to the pantry stalls. Into the leftmost of these the culinaire ambled, going to
the very back. Behind a stack of wheat and barley bags was a red door, ironbound and locked.
With a large key, the Snooks released the door, picked a bright-limn from the wall and took
Rossamünd beyond into a small cold room. Here were kept all the sweet dainties and rare
nourishments set aside for the officers — and especially the Master-of-Clerks. Labels —
handwritten, hand-pasted — identified the contents of many sacks, bags, boxes, tins and other
containers: pickled peaches, plums, apricots, small black fish and so much more Rossamünd
could not catch a glimpse of in the swinging light as he was rushed through the store. For a
breath they paused before a meat safe and several enormous earthen pots of unknown content.
What now? Rossamünd wondered.
Partly concealed behind the pots was another door barely big enough for the old woman to fit
through. A second key opened this port, and she encouraged Rossamünd through with a firm
hand.
At first Rossamünd thought he had been shown into some kind of cupboard, but as the Snooks
pushed in with her bright-limn he discovered that it was actually a landing. Before him he
discerned a tightly winding wooden stair going up and going down. It was a furtigrade — a
secret stair — cunningly built in a cavity between the walls, barely lit with ill-kept bright-limns
fixed to the banister posts.
"This nasty squeeze'll take ye right up to where ye need to go." The Snooks patted a rail.
"For too long I've been jamming me girth between them banisters, and now I hurt right deep in
here," she said, patting her right hip tenderly. "I'd rather not climb anymore."
The meager width of the furtigrade was such that Rossamünd marveled that the Snooks had
been able to make the ascent at all.
"So that's why ye're here and that's where ye're to go with yer bundle. Just take the stairs all
the way till ye come to a door and can't go no more. Bang hard low down and go through. To ye
left ye'll find the surgeon's door, dark purple and banded in iron. Knock three times, then a pause,
then three more, then another pause, then two."
Very unsure, Rossamünd shifted his load. "The surgeon, ma'am?" he asked bemusedly. "Do
you mean Swill?"
"Aye!" she snapped. "And ye tell him when he asks — and I know he'll ask," the corpulent
culinaire insisted as sweat-melted boudoir-cream congealed on her brow in the cool of the
landing, "that Mother Snooks is a-getting too age-ed to be running errands through back ways and
is fed up of nasty, dusty, too-steep, too-narrow stairs. That she has seen fit to send me — that's

ye, boyo — in her stead."
Rossamünd hesitated.
"Up ye go, boyo!" She gave a ghastly grin.
That was enough for the prentice; he climbed. Each stair was just that inch higher than was
comfortable to climb, requiring him to lift his feet awkwardly, every step creaking a protest as it
bore his weight.
One—two—three—four—five—six—seven—eight—nine—ten, he counted under his breath,
switch back!
The whole structure seemed to tremble slightly with every step. Between the rough stone
wall and rickety rail there was barely room for the prentice to swing his elbows. The Snooks
must have been squished like pudding in a dish to come up here.
Gritting his teeth determinedly, Rossamünd climbed in the stuff, dusty, closetlike dark,
marveling at this secret stair and wondering how many folk in Winstermill knew of its existence.
Eyes wide to make the best of the weak light, he hoisted the sack over his back. Something soft
and blunt bumped and prodded again and again into his kidney.
One—two—three—four—five—six—seven—eight—nine—ten... Switch back!
Over and over, higher and higher, and it was colder and darker as he went.
On a landing by a dirty green bright-limn, Rossamünd put the sack down. As he caught his
wind he indulged a little curiosity.
He toed the bag. It rocked and squelched softly.
He gingerly undid the cord that bound the top, already loose and in need of retying — or so he
told himself. The sack sagged open but that was all.
He lifted it up to the light and peeked within... and sat back with a stifled yelp.
An eye had stared back at him.
Rossamünd recoiled, but the eye did not blink or twitch or twinkle with life. A little shaken,
the prentice returned to his investigations. He pulled at the sack's mouth, carefully, cautiously,
and there was the eye again — a dark, sightless eye and an enemic forehead a-bristle with short,
white hairs... and a blunt, broad-nostriled snout. The smell of swine was strong now.
Looking closer he found it was indeed a pig — or the head of one, at least — sitting atop a
gelatinous know of gizzards. He grimaced. What could a surgeon possibly want with a pig's
head? He closed the sack and tied the cord about with the best version of the previous knot he
could manage. He had read that physicians and surgeons like to practice stitching wounds on pig
bits. Or maybe he just wants to cut it up and see what's inside? Rossamünd carried the sack for
several flights more, uneasy with his package now he was aware of its gruesome contents,
holding it away from his body as best he could.
At last the lights stopped at a square portal.
With a low, whistling puff of relief, Rossamünd caught a breath.
There was no handle on the door before him, no grip or lock, just two solid panels of wood,
beg enough, he figured, for the Snooks to squeeze through. He thumped it hard and low and with
a thunk, a click and a whir that made Rossamünd flinch and shy in fright, the portal opened. The
gap revealed the other side was better lit. The prentice gladly snatched up his package and
crouched through and saw that the panels which had slid clear of the portal were really the back
of a heavy bureau. On the farther side of the square opening he was amazed to find himself in a
tight whitewashed corridor. There was a purple door at its farther end, just as the Snooks had
described. What business did Swill have with such a secluded venue? Through the smudgy
mullions of a small window set almost three feet into the wall Rossamünd could see the frigid
night, clear and starlit above the gray mass of Winstermill's roofs, and beyond this the dark line of
the low hills of the Brindleshaws.
He rapped at the door just as he had been told: three knocks, three knocks, two. He could not
hear any sound beyond, and was beginning to hope he could just leave the sack there and go back
down to the kitchen. Douse-lanterns must be soon? Surely his imposition would be done by

now?
The port slowly opened.
Rossamünd came to attention.
Holding a bright-limn high, the owner of a flat round face regarded him shrewdly. "Aye?"
Her thin lips contorted. This certainly was not Grotius Swill. It was the epimelain from the
infirmary.
He declared more boldly than he felt, "Mother Snooks sent me up," and held up the sack. "I
have a delivery for Mister Swill."
"Surgeon Swill to you, young man!"
"Surgeon Swill," Rossamünd mouthed obediently.
The woman looked suspiciously down the long, narrow passage. "Stay," she insisted, and
with a crisp rustle turned and swung the purple door closed. Yet it did not shut, and Rossamünd
was left with a sliver of a view into the room beyond. Her bright-limn made ghastly shadows as
the epimelain shuffled across the room. He heard the creak and latching of some other door, then
stillness. Trying not to make a sound, the young prentice peered through the gap between door
and jamb. In the barely lit apartment was a long, low table with shallow gutters carved down
each side that bent to a stoppered drain at its end. On the floor next to this sat a wooden pail of
sawdust. Between this table and thin, shuttered windows in the right-hand wall stood a life-size
armature of a human body made of wood and porcelain complete with removable parts, which
Rossamünd at first thought with a start was a sickly person retired into the corner. When he
realized what it was, he stared for a moment in horror. Worse yet, what he could see of the back
wall was neatly arranged with several tall screens showing oddly proportioned people in various
stages of flaying, dismemberment or decay. In such grisly surroundings, Rossamünd wondered
how a person could possibly remain in his right mind.
He pushed at the door just a little, his compulsion to see more overcoming his terror of being
caught.
Near the door on a stand was a tray a-clutter with tools designed to prize flesh apart, or clamp
flesh together; things to gouge and maim — all of them laid tidily inside velvet-lined boxes. Next
to these were clumps of frayed cloth he recognized as pledgets and yards of tow, which must have
been for tying off free-flowing wounds. Clustered above were many lamps shuttered with mirrorbacked hoods that would reflect and intensify their light when lit.
He took half a step inside the door. Between the windows was a gaunt bookshelf carefully
stacked with papery piles weighted with jars and pots of dessicated bits and parts: wizened
embryos of unguessable genus, distorted eyeballs, withered organs, all decaying slowly, slowly,
one tiny bubble at a time in preserving alcohols. Stacked with them was a small library of books.
Rossamünd struggled to make out their titles with such little light: Phantasmagoria one read
perhaps; the thickest of all maybe showing Ex Monsteria. He had learned enough from
Craumpalin to realize that these were rare books on forbidden subjects not normally required for a
surgeon to read — and Rossamünd longed to look into them.
Swill's voice, angry and loud, came for some other room deeper within. Rossamünd pulled
away for the fascinating slivered view and as he did, glimpsed a terrible sight: the flayed skin of
a person, glistening as if fresh, pinned out on a frame that stood right by the door. He stoppered a
cry of fright and took a clumsy rearward step.
Better light flooded the apartment and determined steps tramped toward the young prentice
from behind the purple door. It flung wide and Grotius Swill stood there wearing a brown leather
apron besmeared with darker brown stains, his own bright-limn up by his face. He looked
furious.
"I... I have this for you, sir," Rossamünd quailed, lifting the foul sack. "From Mother
Snooks."
Swill took it, looking over his shoulder — gaze catching for but an instant on the flayed skin
— and back to Rossamünd. "Where is the Snooks? Why has she sent you? "

"She is down in the kitchens, I reckon, sir. She says her hip hurts too much to climb the stairs
tonight." He delivered the message exactly as the culinaire had told him.
Swill's lips pursed tight as he listened. His eyes became cold slits.
"I see," he said after a long pause. "And you are her porter, are you?"
"I... I've just done what I've b-been told, sir," the prentice stammered.
"Have you just? By which way did you come, child?" The surgeon's voice was pinched and
menacing. "Who saw you come here?"
Rossamünd tried to hide his fright. "I — ah — I came by — by the furtigrade, sir," he said in
a small voice, pointing back to the barely distinguishable shadow of the bureau. "I — I don't
reckon anyone could have seen me, sir, not at all."
"I see." Swill scratched at his throat. "Wait there," he said quickly, and the door closed,
properly this time. Presently it reopened.
"When you see the Snooks again, give her this." Swill presented Rossamünd with a sealed
fold of paper. "It's my reply." He smiled inscrutably. "She will understand."
Something thumped loudly in the darkened surgery behind. There was a short, stifled yelp
and a muffled, maniac gibbering.
"Go on now, quick-quick, get along! Patients need my ministrations." The surgeon gripped
Rossamünd's upper arm and hustled him back toward the hidden doorway. "Be certain to give
that painted crone my reply," he insisted as the prentice clambered quickly back through the hole
in the wall, knocking his head.
The prentice needed no further encouragement but rushed down the furtigrade, gasping,
taking two or three steps with each stride, daring even to leap whole flights in his panic, the
furtigrade shuddering dangerously. Pig's heads. Flayed skins. Clandestine stairs. What is all
this?
With douse-lanterns imminent, the kitchens were near empty, only the night staff remaining
to stir the pots and bake breads for the morrow's hungry. The Snooks was still at her domestic
throne, waiting for him. "Did ye get the surgeon his bag?" she hissed.
"Aye."
"Did ye deliver me message?"
"Aye."
"Well?" The Snooks thrust her grinning, oily face at the prentice. "How did he like our new
arrangement?"
"H-He just said 'I see'..."
"Is that all?" She grabbed Rossamünd by his sweat-stained smock front. "Just 'I see'?"
The prentice pulled away from her. "And he told me to give you this," he said. The Snooks
took the sealed fold of paper slowly and, reading it, went gray, her boudoir cream showing in ugly
mealy blotches over her now ashen complexion.
Rossamünd shuffled his feet and the Snooks gave him a sharp look.
"Ye may go," she barked.
The prentice hesitated.
"Ye're clear, ye're free! Go! Begone! I'm sick of the sight of ye!" the culinaire cried, waving
the paper in his face. Rossamünd dashed from the kitchen.
"Douse lanterns!" came the call as Rossamünd entered his own cell. He quickly shut the door
and turned the bright-limn, undressing for bed in the settling gloom. Smockless, shirtless and
shivering, Rossamünd sneaked out to the passage between the cells and scrubbed at the sweat and
the cook-room stink as best he might with the frigid water of the common washbasin. The cold
and a silly fear of something creeping at him from behind made him leave off washing, and he
dashed back to his cold cot to shiver the night away, his bed chest dragged out to barricade the
cell's door.

9
Pageant of Arms
august (noun) ruler of a single calendar clave; typically a woman of some social stature, perhaps a peer, or noble,
with a social conscience. To have any chance of affecting their surrounds, calendars need money and political clout,
and those with high standing socially possess with these attributes natively. A clave that does not have ranking
gentry or nobility at its head and core, or at least as a sponsor, will most certainly be marginalized. Augusts are
seconded by their laudes, who are their mouthpieces and their long reach. With a well-organized and talented clave
what her, an august can be a daunting and influential figure in Imperial politics and society.

R

ossamünd was awoken by a heavy pounding on his cell door and a rough voice crying,
"A lamp! A lamp to light your path! Up, you lounging lumps! Up and at 'em — it's a fine day."
It took a few nauseated moments for the prentice to realize he was not in fact being boiled
alive in an enormous bottomless cauldron, but lay pinned in tangled blankets on a lumpy
horsehair mattress in a freezing cell in the basements of the Imperial outpost of Winstermill. As
the rousing groans of the other prentices coughed across the gap between cells, Rossamünd
dragged the small chest away from the cell door. What was it I saw in Swill's apartment? he
fretted. Do people know about his room up there? Those were mighty strange books... and what
about that flayed and pinned-out skin? Do I need to tell anybody about it? But who to tell? At
that moment a larger problem loomed, driving those unsettling things from his thoughts: the
Domesday pageant-of-arms.
The ritual of Domesday for those under Imperial Service at Winstermill was a military
formality of unquestionable antiquity. Every Domesday morning, the whole fortress turned out
on the Grand Mead, all bearing arms before the main building in a pageant of flags, polish and
rich, bright harness. Two-and-a-half hours of marching and speeches, it was a show of strength
of which Rossamünd had quickly grown weary. He had once dearly wanted to see such
spectacles: an array of soldiery gathered as if ready for battle. Watching was one thing but
participating quite another. To march in a parade was a ponderous and worrying chore where
evolutions must be well performed or impositions were imposed.
Sitting shivering on the edge of his cot, he looked forlornly at his unprepared harness. Metal
must be polished with pipe clay and galliskins whitened, boots and belt blacked and brightened.
Denied the opportunity last night, Rossamünd had to do his best to prepare now, which meant
skipping breakfast. With sinking wind he could hear the other prentices stepping singly or in
twos up the stairs of the cell row on their way to eat.
Threnody appeared at his open cell door, already washed and fed, immaculate in her perfectly
presented mottle. "Well, a good morning to you, lamp boy," she said, with a supercilious grin.
"Not ready, I see." She sniffed the night-stale air of the cell and pinched her nose. "Has someone
been using you to wipe out the inside of a lard vat?" she exclaimed in an affectedly nasal voice.
Rossamünd blushed deep rose.
"You'd better get your pace on or you'll never be ready," Threnody continued unhelpfully. "I
have heard how these things go: you'll be censured, brought before a court-martial, and stretched
out on a Catherine wheel if you go out looking less than perfect." She shook her head.
Rossamünd knew she was just being painful, though certainly more pots-and-pans could be
expected for a slovenly showing out.
Threnody huffed and put her hands on her hips as he was struggling to fold his cot corners.
"Leave off, lamp boy!" she insisted. "I'll do that! You just set to your clobber."
The girl worked a modest wonder, folding the corners on the bed neater, pulling the sheet and
blanket tighter and smoothing the pillow better than Rossamünd know was possible. All

extraneous items went into the bed chest, all inspected items arranged in regulation order on the
small stool in the corner. Rossamünd's cell had never looked so deftly ordered.
"Turn out for inspection!" came Under-Sergeant Benedict's warning cry. There was a
boisterous clatter as all the prentices scurried to their cells from the mess hall or wherever they
had been.
Threnody quit the room without another word or even a glance back.
Fumbling buckles and buttonholes, Rossamünd finished dressing in a hurry, still wrestling
with his quabard and his baldric as he took his place at the doorpost. Teeth rubbed with a corner
of a bedsheet, hair combed with his fingers, he stood at attention by his door with only moments
to spare.
Grindrod ducked his head to enter Rossamünd's cell, and looked about, betraying the slightest
surprise at its excellent state. He bounced a carlin off the blanket pulled and tucked drum-taut
across Rossamünd's cot. "All is in order, Prentice Bookchild," he said after he had peered into
every cavity of the tiny quarter. "As it should be. Move out the Rear Walk and make ready for
the pageant."
Assembling with the rest along the tree-lined pathway of the Cypress Walk on the southern
side of the manse, Rossamünd mouthed an earnest "thank you" to Threnody. To this she
responded with the slightest suggestion of a curtsy, then snapped on a serious face as Grindrod
stalked past to check the prentice's dressing. With a cry the sergeant-lighter took his twenty-two
charges out to form upon the Grand Mead, to take their place at the rear of the pageant. Before
them a crowd of much of Winstermill's inhabitants were also gathering in fine martial order,
rugged against the cold.
Marching and standing with the companies of pediteers, peoneers, artillerists and thaumateers
there were very few lampsmen — not even a platoon, seltzermen included. Most able-bodied
lighters had been sent east, needed out on the road proper to replace the steady — and increasing
— losses from the various cothouses. Yet that small, aged group stood in their place bearing their
fodicars proudly, resplendent in the rouge and or and leuc — red and gold and white — of the
Haacobin Empire, and glossy black thrice-highs. Only Assimus and Puttinger looked a little
worse for wear, their evolutions poorly handled.
Formed on the soldiers' left was a veritable army of bureaucratical staff: clerks, under-clerks,
registers, bookers, secretaries, amanuenses, file boys. Each pageant made Rossamünd more
aware of the diminishing ranks of lighters and the swelling number of clerks.
Rooks cawed from the pines by the Officers' Green, spry sparrows and noisy miner birds
hopped and flitted about the battlements, watching on shrewdly. The thin flags borne by colorparties at the front of each collection whipped and cracked in sympathy with the winds that
rushed spasmodically across the Mead, joining the great ponderous snapping of the enormous
Imperial Spandarion billowing above the gatehouse.
At his very first pageant, Rossamünd had trembled at the sheer number of folk gathered, at the
steady pounding din of feet marching on the quartz gravel and at the stentorian hooting arrogance
of flügelhorn, fife and snare. Yet now he was inured to the martial spectacle. It surprised him
how quickly he could reconcile such astonishing wonders and think them a workaday
commonplace.
All the soldiers and their commanding officers were now gathered on the Grand Mead,
decked in their finest.
"Stand fast!" came the cry from Sergeant-Master Tacpharnias.
With a rattling shuffle, the lighters, soldiers and staff came to attention as the seniormost
officers strutted peacock-proud up on to a temporary podium — erected every Domesday for just
this purpose — and stood before the assiduously ordered soldiery. It was the task of the highest
ranked to take turns addressing the parade, and first always was the Lamplighter-Marshal.
Although he was a peer of some high degree, in his soldierly simplicity the Marshal was unlike
many of those standing with him. They were stiff and starched, their rich, finicky, bragging

uniforms boasting of more in themselves than they really possessed.
His volume modulating with the breezes, his words punctuated by the calling of the birds, the
Lamplighter-Marshal spoke loudly and confidently about the details of the routines of
Winstermill, on subjects almost everyone had heard before. He reminded them of duties botched
and the need for vigilance, for care, for the particular regard of one another. The pageant listened
dutifully, for most loved their dear Marshal and knew these things needed to be said. However,
their attention became genuine when the marshal-lighter turned to the disconcerting excesses of
bogle and nicker.
"These theroscades have now become an ever-increasing problem," he said gravely. "Almost
each day reports come to me and I am applied to for aid. Yesterday I learned that the whole 2nd
Lantern-Watch of Ashenstall was slain without quarter, not six nights gone, and also lamps
pushed over on the Patrishalt stretch. Today already I have been informed of the taking of a
family in the broad of day by the walls of Makepeace." There was a chorused murmur of angry
dismay among the lighters and pediteers, while the clerks remained quiet. "Aye, and no doubt ye
are all informed of the assault witnessed five nights ago by our own barely breeched prentices."
The murmur grew to a growl, a rumble of solidarity and resentment. "And yesterday morning
were yourselves witness — as was I — to the end of one of our doughty veterans on the claws of
a blighted beast!"
The growl turned voluble.
"How dare the baskets try such things!"
"We'll have our own back at 'em, just you wait!"
"My brothers!" The Marshal's steady voice stilled them. "From loftiest officer to lowliest
lighter's boy, we must stand together — and we will. We have fought the long fight for eons
beyond the telling of books. Humankind stands and will stand the longer if we stand together.
Even now a faithful band seeks the very beast who slew our brother, as we, undaunted, continue
to keep the way clear and safe. Lighters! We are the bulwark between our fellow men and he
raging monstrous malice: we are the brave band who shall always light the way! Of discipline
and limb!" he cried with a burst of steaming breath, jaw jutting proudly and a deadly gleam aflashing in his eye.
"Of discipline and limb!" cried the many hundred throats before him, Rossamünd's among
them.
Smiling with paternal grimness, the Lamplighter-Marshal took his place at the head of the line
of most senior officers as the Sergeant-Major-of-Pediteers stepped forward with a rousing
monologue of his own. After him cam the bureaucrats, their ornamental wigs drooping curls
almost halfway down their backs: the Quartermaster, the Compter-of-Stores, the rotund worksgeneral, each complaining about some unheeded quibble of clerical detail or neglected civil
nicety. Last of all was the Master-of-Clerks. With saccharine gentility and that never-shifting
ingratiating smile, he droned about some new bit of paperwork required, some new process to
record the change of watches. At times he would say things that Rossamünd did not understand
but had the vast plethora of clerks chuckling knowingly. As the bee's buzz went, the clerk-master
was the darling of the bureaucrats of Winstermill. They looked up to him — so Rossamünd had
learned — not just as their most senior officer, but as a genius of perpetual administrative
reinvention. His only joys were the minutiae of governance and refining of systems that already
worked. Tending to the clerical quibbles of fortress and highroad Rossamünd had heard Assimus
and Bellicos (when he had lived) griping to each other — Podious Whympre was getting a better
grasp upon the running of the manse than the overworked Lamplighter-Marshal.
Near the Master-of-Clerks — as always — was Laudibus Pile, lurking at the back of the
podium, looking out over the pageant with narrowed, quizzing eye. For a beat Rossamünd was
sure the falseman had fixed him with his lie-seeing eyes. The prentice was held in this distant
interrogation till Pile seemed to see what he sought and, satisfied, looked for another to play this
game upon.

Piebald gray clouds stretched over them from horizon to horizon like a roof on the day.
Beneath these drifted smaller, knobbled cumulus blown up by southern winds, increasing the
impression of a vaporous ceiling. Cold clouds these were, but not rainy ones. With the winds
came the faintest scent of the Grume, the great bay to the south. Breathing deeply of this sweetyet-acrid hint, Rossamünd could have sworn he heard carried with it the faintest wailing of
whimbrels — the elegant, scavenging gulls of the southern coasts. The great, hopeless longing to
serve at sea sat like cold gruel in the winds.
With a cry from the gate-watch that cut through the Master-of-Clerks' chidings, the bronze
gates were swung open and a glossy red and brown coach rushed through with all the selfimportance of a post-lentum. It was a dyphr, a small carriage pulled by two horses, its sides
raised and roof lowered.
"Eyes front, you slugs!" barked Grindrod, as several boys turned their heads to see.
The vehicle dashed past the parade, peppering those standing nearest the drive with fine
gravel flicked from its wheels, and pulled up sharply before the great steps of the manse.
Most of those on the podium made to continue, a bloody-minded show of their disregard for
the impetuous arrival. Yet, as the surveyor-of-the-Works finished his housekeeping plaints and
before the Master-of-Clerks could return to reiterate, the Lamplighter-Marshal stepped forward
and, to general relief, ended proceedings prematurely. Finally, with a blare of horns and a rattle
of toms, the pageant-of-arms was done.
Grindrod dismissed the prentices with a simple order of "Port arms!" — perhaps keen himself
to be on with the vigil-day rest. "Master Lately, be sure to report to the kitchens," he reminded
Rossamünd with no evident satisfaction. With that the lamplighter-sergeant walked abruptly off
to join other sergeants milling at the edge of the Grand Mead to watch the small carriage.
Released from the painfully motionless dumb show of the pageant, the delighted prentices
hurried off to get ready for the jaunt to Silvernook, all interest in the dyphr forgotten in their
eagerness to be away.
Rossamünd stayed. He was intensely curious to know of the passengers and in no hurry to
start a long day of pots-and-pans.
Threnody too observed the carriage, her expression strangely intense. She gave a soft groan.
"Yes, Mother, I have been a good girl..."
Rossamünd looked askance at her.
She appeared not to have noticed he was there. He gave a subtle cough.
Threnody nearly betrayed her surprise, but with a haughty toss of raven tresses recovered.
She cocked an eyebrow emphatically at the lentum and said bombastically, "Who is it that has so
quickly come in yonder conveyance, you want to ask? Why, it's my mother, come to chastise her
wayward daughter no doubt, and sermon me on the honor of our clave."
"Your mother?"
"Indeed. She cannot leave me be for a moment! I am not a week gone and a quarto of
troubardiers. He was followed by the Master-of-Clerks and that man's attendant crowd. Dolours
too had appeared, waling over from the Officers' Green, her favorite spot it seemed, from where
she must have been watching the entire pageant unheeded. Two calendars had already emerged
from the dyphr clad in the mottle of the Right of the Pacific Dove, and they acknowledged the
bane's approach with subtle hand-signs. Rossamünd recognized one as Charllette the pistoleer,
though the other he did not know. Standing proud upon the manse steps, the marshal-lighter
greeted the passenger within the carriage with elegant manners, giving a gallant bow as he handed
her out.
"Well betide you, O Lady Vey. A hale welcome to you, August of the Columbines, and to
your attendants, from we simple lighters." His declaration was gracious without being fawning.
The last passenger, a woman with hard eyes, hooked nose and a sardonic curl to the corners of
her mouth, emerged and responded with equal decorum. "Well betide you, sir," the Lady Vey
enunciated beautifully. She was tall, with black hair the hue of her daughter's, yet hers was as

straight as Threnody's was curly. Like everyone that morning, she was dressed against the chill in
a thick mantle of precious, fur-lined silk with a sumptuous fitch of bristling white dove feathers
about her neck and shoulders. Lady Vey stepped away from the dyphr with all the poise and
arrogance of a peer. She glared at the lowering sky and pulled her mantle close with a twirling,
theatrical flicking of its hems.
So that was the Lady Vey, the great august of a calendar clave. So that was Threnody's
mother.
"Ah! There is my laude, the Lady Dolours," the woman declared with a tight smile.
"Always her first, isn't it, mother?" Threnody muttered. "Never a kind thought or concern for
me..."
Dolours bent low, with apparent deep and genuine respect.
"She has been abed with fever, gracious August," the Lamplighter-Marshal declared. "But
our locum has seen to her as best he can."
"And Pandomë, my handmaiden?" The august looked at the faces about her. "I hear she is
badly hurt."
"Your handmaiden mends well in the infirmary... and your daughter too has been installed
safely in her new role. We are glad to have her among us."
"Yes, very good." The Lady Vey looked over her shoulder and gazed around slowly. She
saw her daughter immediately, as if she knew where she was all along. Something profound and
complex transmitted between mother and daughter, something beyond Rossamünd's
comprehension. For all her tough talk and showing away, Threnody seemed to flinch, and hung
her head in uncharacteristic defeat. The Lady Vey swept up the manse steps, unheeding of the
bureaucrats and the attendants all deferring a pace to give her room as she slid past.
Threnody rolled her eyes, bravado quickly returning. "Off to my executioners," she said with
ill-feigned indifference.
Rossamünd frowned and blinked. "Pardon?"
"My mother is never happy with me," she sighed. "And I go to find out just how unhappy she
is..."
"Oh."
Hardening her face and hiding her dismay, Threnody obeyed some invisible command and
left to join the new arrivals.
Left alone as the day-trippers left for Silvernook, Rossamünd went his reluctant way to the
kitchens.
Mother Snooks did not want to see him. Looking haggard, she dismissed the young prentice
from her sight almost as soon as he entered. "Be on ye way! Whatever wicked crimes ye have to
serve yer wretched day atonin' for, it won't be done here. Go!"
Knowing full well that Grindrod had just departed on a south-bound lentum, Rossamünd was
puzzled as to what to do next. It was tempting to exploit this as a twist of fortune and take an
easy day after all. However, if he did not serve one imposition now, he would only have to serve
two later. Knocking at the sergeant's mess door, he asked Under-Sergeant Benedict instead.
"Well, Master Bookchild," the under-sergeant said, stroking his chin, "we must find you
another task, else our kindly lamplighter-sergeant might set you more. If the Snooks won't have
you, then perhaps Old Numps will."
"Who?" Rossamünd asked.
"He's a glimner working down in the Low Gutter. You'll find him in the lantern store, Door
143, cleaning lantern-panes. You can clean them with him — a nice simple task for a vigil-day
imposition."
Rossamünd felt anxious. He had heard of the mad glimner in the Low Gutter. It was the
same fellow Smellgrove had been telling of at Wellnigh.
"Be on your way, lad," Benedict instructed, "and work with Numps till middens. I'll report to
Grindrod that your duty — we'll call it panel detail — was served. Don't look so dismayed."

Rossamünd tried to blank his face of worry.
Benedict smiled and scratched the back of his cropped head. "The glimner might have the
blue ghasts from a tangle with gudgeons, but from what I hear the fellow is harmless."
Rossamünd did not share the under-sergeant's confidence.

10
Numps
seltzermen (noun) tradesmen responsible for the maintenance of all types of lamplights. Their main role is to make
and change the seltzer water used in the same. Among lamplighters, seltzermen have the duty of going out in the day
to any lamp reported by the lantern-watch (in ledgers set aside for the purpose) as needing attention and performing
the necessary repair. This can be anything from adding new seltzer, to adding new bloom, to replacing a broken pane
or replacing the whole lamp-bell.

E

xcept for targets in the Toxothanon, Rossamünd had never gone down into the Low
Gutter. He had often wanted to explore its workings, but he now descended the double flights of
the Medial Stair with flat despondency. A Domesday vigil wasted.
Despite a gathering storm roiling to the south, Rossamünd did not hurry. He took time to
stroll through the Low Gutter, fascinated by this hurry-scurry place. There were many here who
rarely participated in a vigil-day rest. Great fogs of steam seeped from doorway seals and boiled
from the chimneys of the Tub Mill, which stood on the other side of a wide cul-de-sac at the east
end of the Toxothanon. It was a-bustle with fullers entering and leaving, burdened with bundles
of laundry in varying states of cleanliness. The prentice stood aside for a train of porters hefting
loads of clean clothing back to the manse, wondering if any of his own clobber was among them.
Crossing a wide cul-de-sac, the All-About, and passing by the Mule Row, a neat three-story
block of servant housing, Rossamünd could hear the hammering of a smith or a cooper, and with
this the sawing of a carpenter. In the narrow lane beyond, muleteers trotted their mules in and out
of the ass manger, mucking their stalls, scrubbing the animals, feeding them. Beyond the manger
rose the near-monumental mass of the magazine, where much of the manse's black powder was
stored. This structure was said to have ten-foot-thick walls of concrete but a roof of flimsy wood,
there only to keep out rain. If there was ever an explosion, it would be contained by the walls and
erupt through this frangible top far less harmfully into the air.
Dodging a mule and its steaming deposit, Rossamünd made his way across the street to where
the besomers sat beneath an awning determinedly binding straw with wire, making ready for
brooms.
"Well-a-day to you, young lampsman. What can we do for you?" one of the men called as the
prentice approached.
"Hello, sirs," said Rossamünd, and touched his forehead in respect. Almost everyone in
Winstermill was of superior rank to a prentice-lighter. "I seek the lantern store and Mister
Numps."
A queer look passed between the two besomers.
"Do you, then? Well, just keep on your way past us, past the well, and the magazine, through
the work-stalls and behind the pitch stand — that large hutch yonder there. You're looking for the
big depository that's built right against the east-end wall. You want to go through Door 143."
Bidding thanks, Rossamünd followed the friendly directions and found himself before a low
wooden warehouse built beneath the shadow of the Gutter's eastern battlements. On the rightmost
door he found a metal plate that read:

Even as the prentice approached the door the rain suddenly arrived, falling quick and hard.
Unprotected by any eave or porch, Rossamünd ignored all polite custom, opened "143" without a
knock and ducked inside.
The depot beyond was truly the lantern store, he discovered, as his sight adjusted to the scant
light. On either side of him were shelves, ceiling-high and sagging with all the equipment needed
to mend and maintain the vialimns or great-lamps. Rows of lamp-bells without their glass stood
on their collets in a line or hung on hooks from the roof beams. Whole wrought lantern posts
were laid flat in frames, ready to replace any ruined by time or the action of monsters. There
were rolls of chain for mending the winds and with them spools of wire. At the end of this
crowded avenue of metal and wood hung a massive rack of tools used for repair work. Chisels
and heavy saws, sledgehammers, crowbars, mallets, rivet molds, powerful cutters and clamps and
other devices were arranged upon it, all for the singular problems a seltzerman might face.
Despite the rain hammering on the lead-shingle roof, Rossamünd could make out a small,
infrequent tinkling in the gloom, like two people touching glasses at a compliment. He could not
fathom why some happy pair might be taking a tipple in the dim lantern store. Curious, he
followed the sporadic noise deeper into the store. A low, lonely singing, true in tone, deep yet
sweet, came through the dust and tools.

Will the Coster sat in posture,
Upon his bed of hay.
Will the Coster spake, "I've lost her!"
Head sadly hung to sway.
Such sad posture for Will Coster:
"She ne're should gone away."
But Will Coster, he has lost her,
And grieves it ev'ry day.
Beguiled, Rossamünd stepped out form among the shadows and equipment and into the light.
An old-fashioned great-lamp lit the space, with seltzer so new it glowed the color of summerbleached straw. Cluttered about it was a motley collection of damaged and ruined bright-limns,
great-lamps, flares, oil lanterns, even a corroded old censer like those that burned at the gate of
Wellnigh House. Right in the middle of it all was the singer. He was alone, sitting on a wicker
chair and bent over an engrossing task. He hunched strangely in his seat, his face a dark profile
against the seltzer light, his legs pulled up oddly in front. His buff-colored hair was in an
advanced state of thinning, and what little he possessed grew lank and thin to his jawline. He was
winter-wan, and glimpses of his pallid skull gleamed in the clean light.
There was another "chink," and the prentice saw the fellow put a small pane of glittering glass
upon a stack and then, with the same hand, replace this with another dull piece. This he placed in
his lap and, still with the same hand, tipped grit paste from a clay jar onto a cloth laid out on a
broad barrel. He did something remarkable then. He put down the jar and, with a deft movement
of his leg, picked up the cloth between nimble toes and began to polish. He used his foot —
bootless and stockingless even on this inclement day — as easily as another might use a hand.
"H-Hello," Rossamünd said softly.
The fellow hesitated only briefly then kept polishing, round and round with his toe-gripped
cloth. "I felt you there a-shuffling," he said quietly, almost a whisper, so desperately fragile that
Rossamünd stepped closer to hear it better. "Have you come to help me or to hurt me?"
"I — ah... to help, I hope." The prentice smiled nervously to show that he was not a threat.
"You smell like a helper" was the baffling reply.
Thrown by this, Rossamünd stuttered, "Um... A-are you M-Mister Numps?"
The fellow looked up and blinked languidly once, showing a shadowy preview of a lopsided
face. Rossamünd tried not to gasp or start in alarm, yet he still took an involuntary backward

step. The fellow's face, from the right-hand brow and down, was a ruin with scars. His cheek
was collapsed, the right-side corner of his mouth torn wider than it should have been. The
cicatrice flesh went farther, down the man's neck, mostly hidden by his collar and stock.
"No one has called me 'mister' for three years," Numps said with a sad inward look, speaking
with that gentle voice from the left side of his mouth. "But I was a 'mister' before. Mister
Numption Orphias, Seltzerman 1st Class... hmm, that's who I was before. Just Numps now."
"Ah... well, hello, Mister Numps. I've been set duties with you."
The glimner frowned thoughtfully. "All right, then," he said mildly, and went back to
fastidiously polishing the pane in his lap, pressing hard at some stubborn grime. Rossamünd
could see that these stacks of glass panes were for the frames of the lamps and lanterns, big and
small.
"What can I do, sir?" Rossamünd looked about uncertainly.
"Well, you can tell me what your name is, sir," Numps returned, fumbling and dropping his
cleaning rag, then picking it up again with a bare foot.
Rossamünd forgot himself a moment, transfixed by this simple, uncommon action.
"My name is Rossamünd, Rossamünd Bookchild, prentice-lighter."
"Hello to you, Rossamünd Bookchild, prentice-lighter, lantern-stick." Numps smiled shyly
then frowned. "Oh, wait. That's not polite. Shouldn't say 'lantern-stick' to a prentice, should
you? Just Rossamünd then, Mister Rossamünd," he finished, grinning bashfully. "Aye?"
"Aye!" Rossamünd returned the grin. This surely was no madman, just a simple, gentle
fellow. He reached out his hand for shaking.
Numps sprang from his seat, the pane falling to splinter on the boards. His broken face was
aghast, wide eyes dashing up and down from Rossamünd's friendly limb to the prentice's horrified
expression.
It was only then that Rossamünd realized the fellow's right arm was missing and not just the
arm but the entire shoulder too. Not knowing what else to do, Rossamünd dropped his hand. "I'm
so sorry..." he mumbled.
"Oh dear, oh dear," Numps whimpered and began to shuffle those vulnerable bare feet about
in the shards smashed over the floor. "Oh dear, Numps is dead."
"No! Stop!" Rossamünd cried. "You'll cut yourself."
Yet this just seemed to distress Numps more, and he continued to shuffle and murmur, "Oh
dear, oh dear..." A pan and brush were handy, propped against the shining great-lamp.
Rossamünd snatched these up and flicked the broken glass from the floor and into the pan as
quickly as he could. Yet he was not fast enough to stop the glimner from cutting himself badly,
and the man began to splash about in puddlets of his own blood.
"Mister Numps! Please sit, sir." Rossamünd tried to nudge the fellow away from harm. He
held him off with his elbow and swept up the remaining shards from beneath Numps' feet,
brushing up blood with them. "You must sit down, sir, please! Or step away!" Not seeing any
other course, Rossamünd stood and gripped the man by one shoulder and what remained of the
other and shoved him back with surprising ease against the wicker chair.
Numps sat heavily without resistance, saying over and over, "Oh dear, oh dear, so much red.
Oh dear, oh dear, ol' Numps is dead..."
"We must get your feet seen to by Crispus — no, wait, he is gone away..." Rossamünd
managed to wrestle Numps' feet into a better position to see their injuries. His right foot was
slashed with small cuts, especially between the toes, and the blood flowed easy and terribly free.
His left foot had suffered only minor scratches. "Ill take you to Mister Swill—"
"No!" Numps screeched. Not the butcher and his butcher's thoughts!" He wrenched his feet
from Rossamünd's grasp. The prentice was knocked against the barrel, bumping his head
painfully. The glimner's own chair tipped and fell, sending Numps sprawling head over end with
a flail of limbs. He lay on the boards, his wounds still bleeding free.
"But you need to have your foot mended," the prentice pleaded.

"No! No no no..." Numps insisted in return and began to sing. "Too much red, Numps is
dead..."
Rossamünd sat for an exasperated pause, rubbing the smarting egg already swelling at the
back of his head. He could not see how he could force Numps to do anything the man did not
want. I'll fix him myself, then. I'll use my salumanticum!
He grabbed at the nearest, cleanest looking rags and pressed them to Numps' bare foot,
insisting the man hold them there. "I will be back with potives. Just press firm till then!" he said
rapidly and, forgetting his hat, dashed up the avenue of metal and out Door 143. The rain,
prodding him like fingers upon his crown, hurt his bruised scalp. The inclement weather had
driven all others indoors. The windows of the Low Gutter glowed red, orange, yellow, green,
while the noise of working still rang out above the fall of water.
Rossamünd was quickly soaked as he dashed up the nearest stair to the Grand Mead, his hasty
feet splicker-splack splicker-splack in the quickly growing puddles, his thoughts tripping with
him, I didn't mean to scare him, I didn't mean to scare him...
Across Evolution Green he ran, all the way down the Cypress Walk, turned right through the
Sally at the side of the manse and dripped water all along the polished floor and down the steps to
his cell. His salumanticum always sat beside his bed chest. He took it up and made hasty
inventory of its contents. What he needed most was missing: the black powder called thrombis
that made wounds clot rapidly. It was all used on Pandomë's wounds. Indeed, he had attempted
to restock his salt-bag soon after the attack on the calendars, but was still waiting for the correct
permission papers from Grindrod.
"Off to the dispensary, then," he muttered to himself, and ran out of his cell and up the steps
again. "Surely they'll give some to me for an emergency!"
The dispensary was accessed from the infirmary. Entering, Rossamünd recognized Pandomë
in a nearby bunk, despite the bandages that hid most of her face. She was still senseless. With a
shudder, the prentice thought of Numps' ruined features.
From the other end of the long room Surgeon Swill glanced at Rossamünd dismissively at
first, then beadily, discomfortingly, causing the prentice to hesitate. Yet the surgeon said nothing
and returned his attention to an attending epimelain.
Through the dispensary door was a small white anteroom with a barred window at the farther
end. He stepped up to this dispensary window.
It was not attended.
A velvet rope hung by, and the prentice gave this two hearty tugs, which set a hidden bell to
violent ringing. Standing on tiptoes, Rossamünd peered through the bars. From the aisles of
boxes, bottles, drawers and shadows emerged a sharp-nosed, flabby-jowled fellow with a high
collar and a crotchety, querulous mien. This was the almonder, Obbolute Fibullar, script-grinder
and assistant to Volitus — Winstermill's dispensurist. He was a difficult fellow, about as opposite
in temperament to Craumpalin as Rossamünd reckoned possible. The prentice cleared his throat
and, as confidently as he could, made his request.
"What d'you need thrombis for, lantern-stick, coming in here to drip and dribble all over my
floors and onto my counter?" Obbolute leaned toward the bars and glared down at him. "Are you
bleeding?"
"No, sir, I am run out of thrombis," Rossamünd returned, startling himself with his own,
unexpectedly "what-else-do-you-reckon" manner. He held up his salumanticum as evidence.
The dispensary door swung, but Rossamünd, intent on getting the needed potive, ignored this.
"You can wave that salt-bag about and gum away rudely all you like, young fellow." The
obstructive almonder sat back. "I'll need a chit of authority from your commanding officer."
"But..."
"Aye, aye, always ‘but,’" Obbolute mocked. "No chit, no parts! That's the way it runs here.
Time to learn it, don’t you think?" He looked up beyond Rossamünd, dismissing the prentice
with a single gesture. "Ah, welcome back among us once more, sir. How went the course? Did

you get the basket?"
Rossamünd looked up quickly and straight into the mildly amused red and blue eyes of
Sebastipole. The prentice had no notion that the coursing party had returned.
"Well, my boy," he said, ignoring the almonder, "glad to see you again. I have just come
back from the hunt. A grim event when all was done."
"Hello, Mister Sebastipole," Rossamünd replied. There was not time for chatter. Mister
Numps' foot must be attended to. His thoughts spun quickly. Terrible glimpses of Numps dead
in a puddle of red ran through his head. "Please, sir. I need thrombis urgently."
Sebastipole looked at him strangely. He turned to Obbolute, producing a fold of paper. "I
will be needing puleblande, a six-months' dose, and the same of gromwell too, for all it's worth.
And... pass me your stylus, man."
"Of course you will, sir." The dispensurist half turned, ready to fetch these potives, all polite
eagerness to this reader-of-truth. He pulled the pencil from behind his ear and pushed it through
the bars.
"And," the leer continued, looking down to Rossamünd again as he scratched words onto the
fold, "a salumanticum's worth of thrombis too, or any other siccustrumn you might have."
Rossamünd could have cheered for joy and thrown his arms about the leer.
Obbolute's eyes narrowed as Sebastipole handed the paper and pencil through the barred gap.
A glimpse of temper trembled across the assistant's brow. He clearly wanted to contradict this
request, yet how could he? A chit had been provided and, more so, the leer was his superior.
"I, ah — well, I," he spluttered, his thoughts clearly at war, "what were you needing that last
item for, sir?" He looked narrowly at Rossamünd.
"Because this lighter needs it and you will not give it him," Sebastipole returned, his
sangfroid as much as his rank impossible to argue with. "Perhaps you will give it to me?"
A hoarse grumble from his throat and a pointed pause was about all the contrariness Obbolute
dared as he filled the order. The leer took the potives with a solemn thank-you that the almonder
did not acknowledge. As they left the infirmary, Sebastipole gave Rossamünd the thrombis.
"So tell me, young Rossamünd," he said, "how have you recovered from our excitement upon
the road?"
At any other time the prentice would have been all for question-and-answers and exploring
his confusions, but this was not that occasion.
"I am well, sir..." he answered, looking over his shoulder down the passage to his path back to
Numps.
The leer squinted at him sagely. "Indeed? So tell me, what give you such cause for haste?"
"Someone has cut himself terribly, Mister Sebastipole, and I need to get to him right quick to
stop the bleeding!"
"Why did you not bring this ‘him’ to the infirmary?" Sebastipole pressed.
"Because he most definitely refused to come, sir... refuses to be seen by Swill — um, Surgeon
Swill, I meant." Rossamünd could not obey forms of right conduct any longer. "I really must go
now, sir — please give me leave."
"Yes, yes! In fact I shall do one better." Sebastipole put a gloved hand on Rossamünd's
shoulder. "Lead on and I will help how I can. Perhaps this fellow to get to the infirmary where
he belongs."
Rossamünd dashed back out the Sally, into the rain and down to the Low Gutter, Sebastipole
just one step behind.
"Where do you take us?" the leer called over the rush of falling waters. "Who is it that is hurt
so urgently?"
Through gasps and rain, Rossamünd called over his shoulder. "To the lantern store" — puff
— "Door 143" — wheeze — "It's Mister Numps — he's cut his foot with glass..." He almost
staggered in a muddy puddle.
Sebastipole caught the prentice under his arm, saving him from the fall, and dragged him on.

The leer quickened his stride, flying down the alley by the Pitch Stand, Rossamünd trying as best
he could to keep pace.
Throwing back Door 143 and springing inside, they found Numps sleepy yet still holding the
rags to his foot.
"Oh, Numption," Sebastipole hissed.
Rossamünd was amazed at the genuine distress held in that expiration.
"Ready your thrombis, prentice — quick and steady. Now I understand your dilemma."
Hands a-tremble, Rossamünd opened the box and brought out a small sack of the "bonny
dust" — as Craumpalin used to call it.
"We must act apace!" The leer righted the toppled wicker chair and wrestled Numps' leg
upon it. "How did this happen?"
"I just went to shake his hand." Rossamünd's confession babbled out. "Just to make his
friendship, and he jumped and started and the glass fell from his hand and smashed about his
feet."
Numps looked up with slow eyes. "Oh, Mister 'Pole, oh dear, you're swimming in my red
again... Oh dear, Numps is dead..."
"Yes, indeed, Numps, I find you all bloody like before. Easy, now. We'll fix you right, just
like then." Once more Rossamünd was struck by the gentle anxiety in Sebastipole's voice. He
never expected a leer might show such tenderness.
"There is glass still in the cuts," the leer continued. "Do you have forceps? Or spivers?"
Rossamünd shook his head, but had a thought. "I spied pliers on the rack there though, sir,"
he said, even as he went to fetch them. "Here, sir."
"They will do." Sebastipole snatched them. "With haste, Rossamünd, grip his leg under your
arm and hold it firm and sure. This will not be easy — I am no man of physics."
The prentice obeyed with alacrity.
Numps writhed and wailed as the leer poked and probed and tugged at the wounds. "Help
me, sparrow-man! They tear me apart! Limb from limb!" The glimner cried, "Sparrow-man!"
while Sebastipole shouted, "Don't mind his calls, my boy, just hold him steady!" Rossamünd
never let go of Numps' ankle nor allowed his squirming to disrupt Mister Sebastipole's delicate
work.
"Bravo, my boy," Sebastipole muttered as he pulled out a wicked-looking shard, "you have
yourself a strong grip there."
The make-do surgery was mercifully brief. With light-headed relief the prentice tapped
hearty mounds of the thrombis on to a particularly nasty laceration under the knuckle of the big
toe. It was from here that most of the blood had come. He watched as the dark powder quickly
mixed with the gore, coagulating to a sticky, adhering mass wherever it did. When he was
satisfied the thrombis had done its work, Rossamünd bound Numps' foot as tightly as he could
with all the swathes kept in his salumanticum. He sprinkled more thrombis between each bind till
the box of it was all but empty and only Numps' toe tips showed.
Dazed from pain and distress, Numps remained supine among the old lamps.
"When Crispus returns, I'll ask him to come here and do what he can," said Sebastipole. "Till
then you'll just have to hop about, Mister Numps. Fetch that handle cup." He spoke suddenly to
Rossamünd, and pointed to a ladle lying by a puncheon of water near at hand. "He will need
fluid. One who has let free much blood always does."
Rossamünd filled the cup and carefully brought it over.
Sebastipole let Numps drink with noisy thirsty gulps, cradling the glimner's head as he did.
Crouching by, Rossamünd watched, feeling it all his fault. "I'm so... so... sorry for..." he tried.
"Don't fret, prentice-lighter," Sebastipole said. "Our Numps has never been right in the
intellectuals since surviving a theroscade. He has hurt himself before. It was providential I met
you when I did, wouldn't you say? Had I not needed pule-blande so urgently I would have
already been in a meeting with the Lamplighter-Marshal."

"Will Mister Numps mend, sir?"
"Doctor Crispus cites it the worst case of malingering horrors he has ever encountered,"
Sebastipole continued, putting a friendly hand on the glimner's shoulder. "We do what we can, do
we not, Mister Numps, but it just isn't the same, is it?"
Clearly dazed, Numps still managed to answer. "No, Mister 'Pole, never the same, poor
Numps, and por glass too." He started to look around the floor about him.
"You know Mister Numps well, Mister Sebastipole?" Rossamünd asked, feeling a sudden
surge of affection for the leer, so different from the other leers the prentice had encountered.
"We are acquainted, yes," Sebastipole said.
Rossamünd hoped he might say more and waited, but the leer showed no inclination to speak
further. He stood, helping Numps to sit against the glowing great-lamp. The glimner was
shivering, and the lamp offered no heat.
Retrieving his thrice-high from where it dropped, Sebastipole said, "Sit easy now, Numps.
Don't you tread on those clever feet of yours — we don’t want them to bleed again."
To this Numps nodded slowly. "Poor Numps' clever feet. You put me back together again,
Mister 'Pole."
"Indeed, we did what we could." The leer looked pointedly at Rossamünd. "This young
master and I shall find you a blanket."
Rossamünd followed as he went to the farther end of the lantern store.
Sebastipole turned over a bright-limn sitting on a shelf and its soft glow soon revealed a pile
of sacks neatly folded in a flimsy crate. He gathered several and deposited them in Rossamünd's
arms, declaring lightly and loudly, "These will answer nicely!" He fixed the prentice with his
disconcerting eyes. "It was I who found him," the leer said low and serious, "alone and horribly
mangled after the other two seltzermen had been devoured or carried away."
Rossamünd's ears rang as his attention became very focused. "Devoured, sir? Carried
away?" he said, equally softly.
"Yes, carried away." Sebastipole paused, closing his eyes. "It was in the first year that our
Master-of-Clerks arrived. I remember it so because one of his first acts was to insist on a
thorough inspection of all the great-lamps along the road. Numps and others had been attending
to a vialimn out east beyond the Heap, past the Roughmarch and Tumblesloe Cot. As you know,
seltzermen go out in threes — two to work, one to watch with a salinumbus at the half cock —
and return before the lantern-watch starts. But this day they did not arrive by the correct time, a
remarkable thing, for as you know a lamplighter's life is punctuality. Wry and knowing,
Sebastipole looked to Rossamünd, the blue of his eye showing strangely bright in the seltzer light.
The prentice was too intent on poor Numps' story to notice this small joke.
"Though not normally enough to stop the work of a lantern-watch," Sebastipole continued
with a cough, "what they found sent them quickly back to Tumblesloe, half the lanterns still unlit.
By East Sloe 10 West Dove 13 the seltzermen's tools lay scattered, their cart shattered, its mule
torn and mostly eaten, and too close for comfort, they could hear a horrible inhuman calling from
the hills."
Rossamünd let his breath out slowly. "Were you with the lamp-watch, Mister Sebastipole?"
"No, Rossamünd, I arrived the next day. Myself and Mister Clement and Scourge Josclin and
a dragging party of pediteers, lighters and dogs. We did not have to go far to find poor Numps,
though. He was sitting up against the same lamppost where the previous night only signs of
attack had been present. His arm was gone, torn from his body at the shoulder. His face and jaw
were badly gouged, yet somehow he managed to live, even to crawl back to the road. The cold
must have kept him alive, freezing the flow of his terrible wounds. Before or since I've never
known a man to survive such mortal harm."
"Frogs and toads!" Rossamünd whispered in awe.
"Indeed." Sebastipole stood. "But it gets more remarkable still. For not only had a man so
mortally mangled and comatose somehow pulled himself along for who knows how long, he had

also bound his own wounds and stuffed the socket of his shoulder too, using grasses and leaves
with an expertise not even a two-armed man might achieve. How he did this is a puzzle that still
beggars solving... We bundled him back to Winstermill. He woke on the way, yammering from
the horrors and saying such things as you heard him cry today, especially about that little
sparrow-man. From what I know of it, Crispus fought to revive the man while Swill thought it
more a mercy to let him languish and die."
"What a merciless sod-botherer," Rossamünd growled. "Little wonder Mister Numps refused
to go to the infirmary with only the surgeon about."
"Indeed." Sebastipole stroked his chin. "Fortunately for Numps, Doctor Crispus is the senior
man and a brilliant physician. Though I wonder if it would not have been the greater mercy to let
poor Numption pass."
Rossamünd shuddered, glad never to have faced such an impossible choice. "What of the
other seltzermen?" he could not help but ask. "Did you ever find them?"
"We searched as much as we dared." The leer rubbed at his neck like a man exhausted.
"Josclin followed me as I followed the smell of the slot and sight of the drag far up into Hallow
Sill. It was not like any monster's trail I had pursued before: foreign and much fouler. It was a
trace I had only smelled once before, but knew only too well. It was gudgeons. For a week we
searched but found only torn clothing and discarded equipage. The calendars of Herbroulesse
joined us for a time, speaking of a mighty combat heard in the woods beyond their walls, and of
driving off some terrible fear two nights before; but still there was no trace of the other men. I am
sure they had been eaten, for the drag I spied through my sthenicon showed little hint of human
traffic, and the slot smelled only of death and that evil revenant stink. We traced it back in hope
of finding where the revers had come from. Yet the trail ended nowhere, out in the wilds of the
southern marches of the Tumblesloes. We returned to Winstermill with nothing more than tatters
and conjecture, though Lady Dolours searched on. A tenacious woman, she followed the foul,
foreign trail far into marshy lands along the northern marches of the Idlewild, but she too returned
with nothing."
Rossamünd's attention pricked at the sound of Dolours' name. "The calendars helped you?"
he asked.
"Indeed. I have worked with them from time to time, and they with me — especially the
Lady Dolours — snaring corsers and commerce men, foiling the dark trades where we can,
beating off the bogles and the nickers. It's inevitable; in a ditchland everyone must cooperate or
perish in their isolation. The Idlewild prevails because of work as well as ours." Sebastipole
peered at Rossamünd.
"How did a gudgeon find a way out here?" asked Rossamünd. "Did it come from a hobrousing pit?"
A cold and dangerous look set in Sebastipole's weird eyes. "Not very likely. Such criminal
and vile practices do not last long about here, my boy."
"But I thought a dead monster was good whichever way it's done?" Rossamünd spouted the
usual dogma.
The leer regarded Rossamünd closely for a moment. "Some folk might say it's so," he said
carefully, "but I don't care for the justifications they offer on rousing a bogle against a gudgeon.
Coursing monsters as we have done is a needful thing, but making sport of them, especially with
something as abominable as a revenant, is useless and cruel. More so, it ties up the monies of
men who can ill afford it and is ruinous to the lives of the wagerers who lose." He stopped, took a
breath. "We came down very hard on the lurchers after Numps' theroscade."
"Why the lurchers?"
"Because these are the beginning of the whole rotten chain of the dark trades. You can only
get live bogles from the lurchers or human remains from the corsers. If you stop them, then you
stop the therlanes, who then can't supply the commerce men, who have nothing to give to the
ashmongers, leaving them without stock to sell to the massacars or the rouse-masters. Try as we

might, there have yet been other gudgeons marauding, though never again an assault on a lighter.
Enough now! Let us tend again to the needs of Numps. I can hear him shuffling about. We have
muttered overlong on his past and now should labor for his present, after which I must leave you
to your duties as I attend to mine."
Rossamünd returned with the leer, back to the clutter of lamps and lanterns. There Numps,
against instruction, had moved to sit again in his wicker chair and, patiently humming, was
polishing another lantern-window.

11
Hither And Thither
Course (verb) to hunt, particularly to hunt monsters; (noun) the hunt itself, usually referred to as a coursing party,
or in such phrases as "to go on a course." A course is, obviously, a dangerous affair. One undertaken lightly will
always result in the doom of some, if not all, of those involved. A prospective courser is always advised to take at
least one skold and one leer — or, if they are unavailable, a quarto of lurksmen, even a navigator or wayfarer, and a
hefty weight of potives and skold-shot. Not to be confused with "corse," meaning a dead body, a corpse.

T

hough Rossamünd was wanting to ask Sebastipole of the coursing of the Trought, the
leer soon left him and Numps, saying that he was well overdue for an interview with the
Lamplighter-Marshal.
Numps, wide-eyed, watched the leer leave and then bent to his labors once more, humming as
he cleaned. Rossamünd did not know how to talk to Numps. He was afraid to frighten the
nervous glimner again and so he moved slowly, looking for work to do. He found a rag, sat on an
empty chest on the other side of the bright great-lamp and silently began to polish lanternwindows.
Wrapped in the canvas sacks for warmth, Numps did not complain. He did not even
acknowledge Rossamünd. Instead he took every pane the prentice cleaned and polished each one
again just as fastidiously as if it had never been worked, adding it to the sack of other lustrous
panes. Frustrating as this was, Rossamünd did not grumble but kept at the task. Every so often
he would lean down and check Numps' feet, to make certain no blood showed through the
bandages, or chide the glimner carefully if, from habit, he should try to use his foot to grip or
hold. They kept at this for an hour or more till he accidentally grasped at the same dirty pane the
glimner grasped from the top of the diminishing stack.
"Oh" was all Numps said, letting the pane go and humbly placing his hand in his lap.
"Sorry, Mister Numps... and I'm sorry about before. For scaring you and making you drop the
glass and cut your feet."
Numps must have rarely received an apology, for with each contrite word that Rossamünd
uttered, the glimner interjected with a blink and an odd, hesitant "Oh."
"That's just silly poor Numps forgetting his-self. All a-flipperty-gibberty since Mister 'Pole
found me swimming in red." He hung his head. "I've never been as I was." He sat like this for
several minutes, Rossamünd not daring to move or interrupt. "Time to make seltzer!" Numps
suddenly straightened, ready to get to his feet.
"No! Mister Numps!" Rossamünd lurched to his feet, forgetting his caution in his concern
for the man's wounded sole. For an instant he feared he might have spooked the man again, but
Numps just looked at him, puzzled, holding himself between sitting and standing. "You must
have a care to stay off your bad foot. Hop on your good foot like Mister Sebastipole said, till
Doctor Crispus has declared you whole."
Offering himself as a small crutch, the prentice helped Numps out of his seat and guided the
limping glimner over to where he pointed: a collection of barrels and chests gathered in a corner
between the wooden wall of the store and one of the too-cluttered shelves.
"They say I'm struck with horrors," the glimner said, pressing down heavily on Rossamünd
with each hop, "and I know I'm not the old Numps, just poor Numps now; but I still remember
how to mix the seltzer — they still come to me to make it ‘cause no one makes it as well. I might
be rummaged all about up here," he said, patting himself on the side of his head, "them pale runny
monsters saw to that, but that don't mean I have forgotten."
Numps prized off the lid of one barrel, releasing a distinct tang into the stuffy lantern store,

and Rossamünd immediately recognized the sealike odor of sweet brine — the beginning of
seltzer water. Humming tunefully, the glimner began to take all manner of chemicals from chests
and boxes close to hand. With precise care he dripped, scooped, tapped and tipped each part into
the barrel of brine. At each addition he stirred with slow, fine movements; first one turn of the
clock then the other for set counts that he spoke under his breath. "Once clockingwise, fours
contrawise..."
Rossamünd knew the basic constitution of seltzer water: spirit-of-cadmia, bluesalts, chordic
vinegar and wine-dilute penthil-salts. He had been shown this by Seltzerman Humbert, and at
first Numps followed the recipe properly but then he put in only half the chordic vinegar, left out
the penthil altogether and began to add other things — unusual-looking things. Of what
Rossamünd saw, he recognized a dash of ethulate and pinches of soursugar, plus a fine sandy
powder that smelled like the vinegar sea and sludge that looked ever so much like the mucking of
a gastrine.
"What are these for, Mister Numps?" the prentice inquired of the extra parts. "I have seen
seltzer made — Seltzerman 1st Class Humbert has shown us, but he never added these."
"Oh... ah... Mister Humble-burt is good at the simple seltzer, but this is our own seltzer.
Better seltzer for Numps' friends. Numps and his clever old friend, we figured this, figured it out
before poor Numps' poor clever old friend is gone now but Numps still remembers; makes the
bloom bloom it does, good for Numps' friends."
"What friends, Mister Numps?" Rossamünd was finding it hard to follow the thread of
wandering talk. "Do you look after all the bloom?"
The glimner became silent at this, and would say no more on the subject of bloom or seltzer
or friends new or old. Rather he kept pointedly at his mixing until he had made three kegs full of
seltzer — smelling far more rich and full than seltzer usually did.
As the day waned someone came a-calling. At first they simply heard her. "Numps! Numps!
was the demand. "Hullo there, my darling muddle-head! Help me git this glass through yer
door!"
"Oh, oh, oh," fretted Numps, up to his bicep in seltzer. "The barrow woman is here. The
barrow woman."
"I'll go. You stay here."
Rossamünd answered the shout in the glimner's stead, stepping down the avenue of shelves to
discover a woman wrestling a heavy load through Door 143. She wore a buff-leather apron over
her maid's clothes and was towing a barrow stacked high with panes and lantern-windows. When
this laboring lady saw a well-presented prentice-lighter she pulled up short and smiled. "Oh,
hello, my lovely."
"Hello," Rossamünd replied. "May I take that?" He had gripped the barrow by the handles
before she could reply.
"What a precious little mite you are!' She exclaimed. "Doing my job for me? And grateful I
am too." She leaned toward him and whispered conspiratorily, "That seltzerman is a bit too gone
in the intellectuals for my liking. I don't much enjoy having to come down here. Folks avoid
him, you know."
"No need then for you to see him today, mother labor," Rossamünd replied peevishly.
The woman gave Rossamünd a sharp, appraising look. "Ye must have done summat right bad
to be sent here, lad." She peered closely, seeking the fatal flaw. "Ye've got to take him in hand,
pet, if ye're going to get anything done with him," she said. "He's naught but a limpling-head,"
she finished loudly, for Numps to hear.
Rossamünd felt a surge of anger. He almost forgot his manners as she bid good day, scowling
after the woman as she left.
With her departure Rossamünd and Numps set to stacking then polishing these new deliveries
and kept at this for what remained of the day. Neither spoke, and there came no other noise but
the chink of picking up and putting down till mains was rung and Rossamünd realized he had

missed middens, entirely forgotten. With a bow he went to hurry off. "Good evening to you,
Mister Numps," he said as he left. "I hope your foot heals right quick. Don't walk on it nor use it
for any work, please. Wait for Doctor Crispus to see you."
Numps blinked at him, nodded — with a small, cryptic smile lighting his face — and said,
"Will you come back tomorrow and check on poor Numps' poor foot?"
"I will, Mister Numps."
Rossamünd returned to the manse, wishing he had met this fascinating fellow well before
today.
*

*

*

*

*

The other prentice-lighters were not due back from Silvernook till after mains — part of the
vigil-day privilege. Rossamünd took himself to the mess hall to eat alone. There he found
Threnody back from interviews with her mother and by the fire, sitting on a tandem chair reading
a book — a novel, no less, that most frivolous of frivolous things. Two small pots, one of
delicious muttony-greasy and one with gray pease, bubbled over the fire for any who had stayed.
On the table there was also some hardtack and apples still untouched from middens, and piping
Domesday pudding. As he was serving mutton into a shallow square pannikin, Threnody walked
wearily over and did the same. She sat before Rossamünd, full of mystery and reticence.
Rossamünd broached the hush. "I thought you'd eat with your mother."
"So did she." Threnody smiled sourly, then added, "I told her I was a lighter now and was
duty bound to mess with my fellows-in-arms."
"She came a fair way to see you. Did she not insist?"
Bent over her food, the girl looked at him sharply through her brows. "She ranted and railed,
as always."
"What did she say?" Rossamünd knew he had asked too much as soon as he said the words.
Threnody stared at him owlishly. "Insufficient to detain me... clearly."
Muteness descended and stretched out into a heavy awkwardness. The cooking fire crackled
in the hearth. Merry fife music, distant, rhythmic stomping and timely claps drifted through the
mess-hall door. This was the ruckus of soused lampsmen and pediteers cozy in their own messroom making happy on their vigil-day rest.
Rossamünd sighed. Threnody was hard work. "And Pandomë — is she healing?"
Threnody bowed her head.
Have I said too much again? Rossamünd wondered.
"She... recovers," the girl replied eventually. "She will return with Mother though both physic
and surgeon agree that she is unlikely to fight again." For a breath she looked truly, openly sad.
"Do you think I'm to blame, Rossamünd Bookchild?"
Rossamünd hesitated. "Blame?"
"For Pandomë's hurts!" Threnody stared hard at him. "For — Idesloe's death..."
He was unsure of how to soothe her sorrow.
"I returned from Sinster's sanguinariums little more than eight months ago," she continued,
her whispered words spilling, wide eyes imploring. "I have only been allowed to begin using my
new ‘skills’ in the last month. Yet, I am a wit: what else could I do? I had no pistols. We were
attacked. I did my part, defended my clave, did duty to them firstmost! The others were all too
battered by the crash. I had to act! If I had been made a fulgar I would have done better, and
better yet as a pistoleer — you saw how frank my shots were against that umbergog thing. It was
not some self-centered display of valor. Was it? Did I set us all to risk like Mother insists I must
have?"
This was more than Rossamünd wanted to answer.
"Practice makes it, miss," he tried, feeling very inadequate. "It's as my dormitory master used
to say: learn it as rote and it'll work freely like hearth-softened butter, if you get my meaning."

Impatience flickered across Threnody's face. "I'm not sure that I do." Her earnest openness
vanished like the snap of a closing lid.
"Well — I was–" Rossamünd started and did not know where to go — trying not to be rude,
he concluded to himself.
Threnody arched an eyebrow.
"Will you be returning to your mother this evening?" Rossamünd quickly changed tack.
"No, she has said all she wanted to say — and more besides," Threnody answered sourly.
"We are done. Fortunately, she will leave again tomorrow and take Dolours and dear Pandomë
back to Herbroulesse.
With a thump the prentices, soused and swaggering from their vigil-day excursion, bundled
into the mess hall.
The strange, strained conversation ceased.
"Hoy there, you sobersides! You should have seen it!" Punthill Plod effused.
"Seen what?" Threnody returned icily.
"Aye, Rosey, you missed a real bust-up," bragged Arabis, completely ignoring Threnody. "A
carriage was attacked by some nickers — horses dead, lentermen dead, passengers dead."
"Just like we saw on lantern-watch," Plod continued.
"I heard them say in town that it was done by some nasty grinning blightlings," Crofton
Wheede added.
Rossamünd's milt went cold. Grinnlings?
"That company of lesquins we saw camped just a mile farther down was not much use to
them poor folks, was it?" said a prentice named Foistin Gall.
Rossamünd's ears pricked up at the mention of lesquins, those gaudily dressed sell-swords —
the best, most arrogant fighters, who gathered into legions and sold themselves to fight in the
petty wars of the states.
"What are they doing there?" Threnody frowned.
"People are saying because we can't stop the baskets on the Wormway that the Gainway is
under threat!" said Onion Mole in awe.
"Not as under threat as that sweet li'l dolly-mop at the Drained Mouse, not from the looks you
were giving her, Moley," guffawed Twörp stupidly, and several boys brayed in drunken delight.
Threnody gave them all a single dirty look and left.
Mind spinning what memories of Licurius collapsing under a press of grinnling bogles,
Rossamünd was not long in following.
*

*

*

*

*

The routine of the next day began as it always did, with the ritual wake-up cry, hurried
dressing and stomping out to line up for the morning forming on the Cypress Walk by the side of
the manse. There Grindrod confirmed the attack on the carriage between the fortress and
Silvernook, everyone slaughtered. He quickly moved on to properly inform the prentices that the
coursing party had returned the previous day while the boys were living it large in Silvernook.
The courser's homecoming had been somber. They were less five dogs, including the leader
Drüker. And Groffstitzig was badly hurt. An ambuscadier was dead, the badly wounded Josclin
borne back on a litter. These were bitter blows indeed after Bellicos' death. Even mortality hurt,
the harried umbergog had proved a terrible adversary, trapped in a hollow on the western flanks
of the Tumblesloe Heap far to the north. It was slain at last by the chemistry of Josclin and a
final, fatal shot from Sebastipole's deadly long-rifle. The severed head of the vanquished monster
had been dragged all the way back by the mules.
The prentices did not know how to react to this: was it good news? Was it bad?
Grindrod also advertised that that very night in the Hall of Pageants there would be the
puncting — the marking with the monster's blood — of those who had had a hand in slaying the

Herdebog Trought. Collected from the dead umbergog at the time of its slaying, the cruor was in
the care of Nullifus Drawk. He was apparently eager and ready to mark the monster's killers.
Rossamünd did not want to go. He had lost his fascination for cruorpunxis. Their gaining was
surrounded by too much sorrow and confusion. He well understood why his old dormitory master
was ashamed of the tattoo he wore.
After breakfast the prentices were set to more marching. Rain set in, a gray shimmering
swathe, and dripping-drenched they formed up along the side of the gravel drive to mark the Lady
Vey's otherwise unfeted departure. "Present arms!" came the order. Next to Rossamünd,
Threnody obeyed, staring fixedly ahead, chin high, a sardonic half smile barely hidden. For her
part, as the dyphr clattered by, the august ignored her daughter and the twin-file of prentices with
her, her nick held stiff and chin raised.
As mother, as daughter, Rossamünd observed.
*

*

*

*

*

For 2nd morning instructions the prentices went to the lectury for lantern workings with
Seltzerman 1st Class Humbert. Rossamünd liked the subject: he actually understood and admired
the mechanism of a seltzer lamp and the constitution of seltzer water itself. This study was a
relief from marching and evolutions and targets. In fact, and despite himself, he welcomed the
safety of routine. The last week had been as event-filled as ever he wanted. Too much adventure
left him craving easy predictability. With a contented lift in his regular-step Rossamünd entered
the lectury carrying stylus, books and lark-lamp — a small replica of a great-lamp given to all the
prentices. Rossamünd was intrigued by the curious way its covers folded open upon many
hinges, fascinated with the down-scaled workings revealed within, which were just like those that
operated the real lights of the road. He paid close attention to all that was taught, but most of the
other prentices could not have given two geese about the what or how or why of a great-lamp's
internal parts. Humbert noticed neither. He simply droned on.
Rossamünd had quickly learned that lampsmen naturally, though unfairly, regarded
seltzermen as failed lighters who only ever ventured out into the wilds with the sun, and then only
when need demanded. They were appreciated, certainly — repairing the great-lamps was
necessary work — but not respected. Consequently, it was with mixed gratitude that Rossamünd
received Mister Humbert's uncharacteristic praise when, in the face of his fellow prentices'
ignorance, he speedily identified a limp, pale yellow frond the seltzerman held up as "glimbloom
drying out and past saving, Mister Humbert."
"Correct!" the seltzerman returned. "How long can the glimbloom survive out of seltzer
before it reaches this irrevocably parched state?"
"No more than a day, Mister Humbert."
"Well, Master Bookchild, you know what you're about with them parts." The seltzerman 1st
class brightened. "It takes just this kind of nous to keep these plants working. We'll make a
seltzerman out of you yet."
"Aye," Rossamünd heard muttered behind him, "or maybe you'd make a good weed-keeper,
Rosey?" There was the sound of soft laughter.
Rossamünd did not look around.
However, Threnody did. "Better to be good for something than a good-for-nothing bustlechaser," she hissed, unable to tell between good-natured jape or insult.
"Young lady!" Mister Humbert called long-sufferingly. "You might be the only lass at
prenticing, but don't think you'll have special concession from me. Please turn around and refrain
from disturbing the others."
*

*

*

*

*

Skipping the sit-down meal at middens, Rossamünd grabbed some slices of pong and hurried
to Door 143 in the Low Gutter and his promised visit with Numps. The Gutter was busier on a
normal day, and Rossamünd had to negotiate the bustle of laborers and servants and soldiers. He
entered the lantern store quietly and heard speaking: not one of the soft monologues of Numps,
but the voice of a learned man.
Rossamünd became very still and listened.
"...Poor old Numps wouldn't tolerate Mister Swill, eh?" the voice declared. It sounded like
Doctor Crispus. He must have returned from his curative tour. "I must say I can barely compass
the man myself: entirely too wily, all secrets and heavy-lidded looks and smelling some highly
questionable chemistry..."
Although he was aware that it would be proper to make his presence known to the speaker, a
guilty fascination held Rossamünd and he remained tense and quiet.
"...Coming with his uncertain credentials, when all the while a proper young physic might
have been satisfactorily summoned from the fine physacteries of Brandenbrass or Quimperpund.
A product of the clerical innovations of that Podious Whympre. Everything in triplicate and
quadruplicate and quintruplicate now! One thousand times the paperwork for the most trifling
things, and all requiring our Earl-Marshal's mark. How the poor fellow bears with the smother of
chits and ledgers is beyond me: my own pile near wastes half my day!"
As Rossamünd moved to the end of the aisle he found it was indeed Doctor Crispus, sitting on
a stool and ministering to the dressings on the glimner's foot with intense concentration. He had
examined Rossamünd on the prentice's very first day as a lamplighter, and had had naught to do
with him since. Numps was sitting meekly on a barrel waiting for the physician to finish. He
looked up at Rossamünd before the lad had made a sound and smiled in greeting. The physician
himself had still not noticed Rossamünd.
"Ah, Doctor Crispus?" the prentice tried, shuffling his feet to add emphasis.
With a start, the physician stood and quickly turned, catching at his satchel as it slid from his
lap.
"I have come to help Mister Numps again," Rossamünd added.
"Cuts and sutures, lad!" Crispus exclaimed with a flustered cough. "You gave me a smart
surprise!" A towering, slender man — Doctor Crispus must have been the tallest fellow in the
whole fortress and probably all of Sulk End and the Idlewild too — he was sartorially splendid in
dark gray pinstriped silk, wearing his own snow-white hair slicked and jutting from the back of
his head like a plume. He wore small spectacles the color of ale-bottles, and a sharp, intelligent
glimmer in his eye boded ill for any puzzle-headed notions. "Ah, hmm..." The man composed
himself. "Master Bookchild, is it not?"
"Aye, Doctor," the prentice answered with a respectful bow. "At your service, sir," he added.
"And so you have been, Master Bookchild," the physician said, clicking his heels and giving a
cursory nod, "of service to me, and more so to this poor fellow here, as I understand it." He gave
a single, paternal pat on Numps' shoulder.
Numps hung his head and smiled a sheepish smile.
Rossamünd did not know what to say, so he simply said, "Aye, Doctor."
"See, Mister Doctor Crispus, see: Mister Rossamünd has come back again and Numps has a
new old friend. They let him in, did you know? They never let my friends like him in before, did
they? Maybe one day they'll let the sparrow-man in too?"
Crispus smiled ingratiatingly. "Yes, Numps, yes. I see."
Baffled but deeply gratified by this reception, Rossamünd asked, "How is your foot today,
Mister Numps?" The bandages seemed still tightly bound and in their right place.
"Oh, poor Numps' poor foot," Numps sighed. "It hurts, it itches. But Mister Doctor Crispus
told me well stern this morn that I was to leave it be... so I leave it be." He wiggled his toes.
"And so you must." Distractedly the physician pulled a fob from his pocket. "Ah! Middens
is already this ten minutes gone," he declared. "I must eat like any man jack."

"Doctor Crispus?" Rossamünd dared.
"Yes, Master Bookchild, quickly now: middens is not the meal to be missed. Breakfast
maybe, mains surely — but never middens." Crispus took off his glasses and dabbed at them
with the hem of his sleek frock coat.
"Was Mister Numps right not to want to go to Swill?" Rossamünd inquired.
The physician nearly blushed. "Oh... Heard my complaints, did you?" He paused
thoughtfully for several breaths. "Please disregard an unguarded moment. Those were just
professional frustrations requiring a little letting. It's a small understanding between Numps and I
— whenever we meet: I run away at the mouth, he listens. That being so," Doctor Crispus
carefully continued, "I would rather you came to me with your ills, or the dispensurist or even
Obbolute if I'm incommunicado; or just go sick until I return, than put yourself into the hands of
that hacksaw." With a cough Crispus looked Rossamünd square in the eye. "I would thank you
not to say any more of that which you have overheard."
Rossamünd ducked his head, going shy from the confidence this eminent adult was putting in
him. "Not a word, Doctor." He nodded gravely.
"How-be-it, eating is overdue." Doctor Crispus pointed at Numps' legs. "I have applied new
bandages but that is all: your use of the siccustrumn was exactly right. The lacerations are deep
but the potive has been well applied and is doing the healing work far better than any I could now.
You have been given charge over a salumanticum for good reason, prentice-lighter."
Rossamünd bowed again, unable to hide his grin of delight.
"Enough now, food awaits." Doctor Crispus gathered up his satchel and stray instruments.
"After that it's back to that stout fellow, Josclin —may his skies seldom cloud."
"Is he mending, Doctor?" Rossamünd ventured.
"If you are a wagering man, Master Bookchild," Crispus said as he began his exit, "I would
put my haquins and carlins on Mister Josclin's full recovery! Good diem to you and good diem to
you, Mister Numps. I shall return in a few days to ensure your clever foot — as you call it — is
still mending. I have seen you return from the very doors of death, my man. Your foot will not
unduly trouble you."
With that the physician hustled out of the lantern store.
Numps immediately began cleaning panes. "Mister Doctor Crispus and Mister ‘Pole doesn't
know all what happened." The glimner did not look up, but spoke into his own lap.
There was a long pause.
"Doesn't know what?" the prentice pressed as gently as he could.
"He didn't tell it like things happened..." The glimner went on. "I didn't go a-crawling back
to the lamppost..."
Realizing what Numps was talking about, Rossamünd leaned a little closer.
"I remember... Even now when I sleep I remember. Poor Numps was dead in his puddle of
red, no crawling about for him. It was the little sparrow-man that helped me."
Rossamünd's attention prickled. "The little sparrow-man, Mister Numps?" he asked very
quietly. This was the type of talk that could get you branded ‘sedorner.’
"Yes, yes." Numps smiled, looking up at last. "They might have got my arm to gnaw on, but
they didn't get all of poor Numps. It was the little sparrow-man that fought the pale, runny men—
"
"I heard you were hurt by rever-men!"
"Oh aye, aye! Pale, runny men ripping us all to stuff and bits and that little sparrow-man
came and tore them limb from limb and saved me — my first new old friend. He plugged all the
pains with weeds and stopped the red from its flow-flow-flowing... Fed me dirty roots. That
made me feel safe."
"That little sparrow-man?" Rossamünd repeated.
"Aye, this big" — still gripping a pane, Numps adumbrated a creature of short stature with his
hand — "and with a large head like a sparrow's, a-blink-blink-blink."

A hunch tickled at the back of Rossamünd's mind. Could it be the same creature? "I think I
have seen him myself," he said.
Numps became all attention, and he too bent forward in his seat.
"Not a long time ago I spied him," Rossamünd continued, "on the side of the Gainway going
down to High Vesting, a nuglung with a sparrow's head all dark about the eyes and white on his
chest, blinking at me from a bush."
A little taken aback, Numps blinked quickly. "Yes yes, Cinnamon — he helped me! I reckon
he's got more names than I've got space in my limpling head to count, he's been about for so, so
long... Long-living monsters with long lists of names."
Cinnamon, Rossamünd marveled. "How do you know this, Mister Numps?" he whispered.
"Hmm, well, because he told me," Numps answered simply. "Cinnamon is poor Numps'
friend too, see, ‘cause it was him hat beat the runny men."
Rossamünd felt something between awe and a habitual, thoughtless horror. "You are friends
with a nuglung?" he breathed, reflexively looking over his shoulder for unwelcome listeners.
Numps grinned. "Ah-huh. Cinnamon said he was come from the sparrow-king who lives
down in the south hills. He keeps an eye out for old Numps, sends his little helpers to watch."
"The sparrow-king?" Rossamünd scratched his face in bewilderment. His thoughts reeled at
the thought of a monster-lord living near.
"Yes yes," Numps enthused. "The Duke of Sparrows, the sparrow-duke; he has lots of names
too.
The Sparrowling
Is an urchin-king
Who rules from courts of trees.
He guards us here
From the Ichormeer
And keeps folks in their ease."
"Have you seen the Duke of Sparrows, Mister Numps?"
Numps shook his head. "But I would like to, though."
"So would I," Rossamünd admitted.
"But you can see him anytime, Mister Rossamünd!" The glimner pulled a perplexed face.
"All the old friends would be your friends, wouldn't they?"
The young prentice hesitated. "All the old friends? What do you mean, Mister Numps?"
"Yes, yes! My poor limpling head — the nuggle-lungs and glammergorns and the other old
friends."
"I — I have one old friend such as this," Rossamünd dared. "His name is Freckle. He is a
glammergorn who helped me when we were trapped in a boat with a rever-man. We set Freckle
free."
Numps listened to this short telling with growing intensity. At its conclusion he grinned
rapturously and did a little sit-down dance, chiming,
Yes yes, you set him free,
trapped in gaol is no place to be.
...you are a good friend indeed for Numps to have who sets his fellows loose from traps. Good
for Freckle too."
"I don't like to tell anyone about him," Rossamünd warned. "You should not say either,
Mister Numps, about Freckle or Cinnamon. Most people don't like those who are kind to
nickers."
Numps' enthusiasm vanished. "I remember that folks hate the nuggle-lungs." He nodded

glumly. "And the hobble-possums and all the gnashers, friend or bad. I remember that them that
talk with them nor think them friends are hated too. Don't be a-worrying and a-fretting, I won't
say naught ‘bout Cinnamon nor Freckle, and I'll not say naught ‘bout you neither.
They set to polishing panes again, Numps redoing Rossamünd's as he had done on the day
before. This time the prentice did not mind. He was already being wooed by the timber-andseltzer-perfumed ease of the lantern store, the rumble of rain on its shingle roof adding a merry,
monotonous melody. It was with profound reluctance that he returned to his usual tasks at
middens' end.

12
Punctings And Posters
graille(s) (noun) tools of a punctographist. A marker needs four particular utensils to make a cruorpunxis upon
the skin: the guillion — also called an acuse or zechnennadel — the needle dipped in cruor and then pricked into the
skin; the orbis — in full, orbis malleus, a disc-headed mallet with which the guillion is tapped to puncture the skin
and leave a mark; the sprither — the device used to extract the blood from a monster in the first place; the bruicle —
the container in which cruor is kept till needed and into which the guillion is dipped every twenty taps or so to refresh
the blood. Other tools necessary to a punctographist are a notebook and a stylus to take a likeness of the fallen
monster's face (either by description or by the presence of a corpse — or the head at least). From this the design of
the mark is then figured, usually in consultation with the "markee."

T

hat night after mains the prentices gleefully attended the evenstalls puncting, happy to
have something to celebrate. Waiting for the officers and other senior ranks to enter before them,
the lantern-sticks formed up along the low fence that hedged the Dead Patch, where the corpses of
the first common lighters and pediteers had been buried into the very foundations, feetfirst to
conserve room. There they waited dutifully as he higher ranked — dazzling in the polish of their
uniforms — entered the hall. The Dead Patch always made Rossamünd fretful; he associated
graveyards with the dark trades and, after his experience in the hold of the Hogshead, with revermen too. It was just as well the Dead Patch was properly lit, for this helped a little with the
prickling terrors that crept under his scalp and down his neck. He shivered at thoughts of
boatholds and fould things snatching from the dark.
"Be still!" Threnody complained alongside him.
"Be still yourself," Rossamünd spat back, under breath, with a rapid glance in Grindrod's
direction. Despite himself, Rossamünd was growing weary of Threnody's fractious manners. On
his other side he felt Wrangle shift minutely and dart a worried, warning look at them both.
Threnody stared hard at him from the corner of her eye. "What's your trouble, lamp boy?
Missing your old nursery maid?"
"Shh!" Onion Mole hissed over his shoulder.
"Shh yourself, dolt," she hissed in turn.
There was never any talking when the prentices were in line, but if Rossamünd did not say
something she might go on and on at him. "Clamp it, Threnody, or we'll all get pots-and-pans!
For you prenticing might be just to get away from your mother, but for me it's my life."
Threnody went pale and did not say another word.
Rossamünd was grateful when he and his fellows were finally ordered inside, making their
solemn way over the ledger-stones of long past heroes that paved the path to the Hall of Pageants.
Within was a small oblong amphitheater. On three sides tiered stalls of seats rose about a
rectangular floor. Displayed grandly at the farther end of the amphitheater were the mighty
antlers of the Herdebog Trought, each one lustrous black and as long as two tall men lying endon-end. The monstrous trophy had been stood upright in a makeshift frame, the violent curves of
both antlers spreading out over the stalls from one side of the hall to the other. Removed from the
Trought's corpse with sectitheres, the horns had required a whole platoon of peoneers to bring
them into the hall. Rossamünd had faced the Trought upon the road and seen its great size
firsthand, but the dimensions of its antlers astounded him. The rancid musk of the monster was in
them, tainting the air thickly, and he could see the damage from Threnody's or Sebastipole's
shooting: an obvious pale gouge in the glossy black velvet. The strong smell brought up
unwelcome confusions. He wondered sadly how long the creature had walked the world before
the ambitions of men had interrupted its ancient existence.

Before the antlers were two chairs and a small desk arrayed with odd-looking tools.
The Hall of Pageants was filled to standing room, everyone decked in their best and cleanest.
The greater ranks sat in the lowest, most padded and plush pews. At the very back on the highest,
farthest, least comfortable benches, the prentices took their place. Troubardiers stood along the
wall partly silhouetted against the long, thin windows that showed the last blood-orange glow of
sunset against a turbid cloud bank rolling north in a close, blue sky.
"Stand fast!" came the cry, and the room stood to attention, hats off indoors and respectfully
in hand. The Lamplighter-Marshal and the Master-of-Clerks and all those of eminence filed from
some hidden ingress and took their easy seats in the frontmost rows. They sat and the rest of the
room followed. The baritone buzz of quiet eagerness resumed till two men stepped onto the floor
and strode conspicuously to the chairs.
Quiet reigned again.
Bemused, Rossamünd knew the first man to be Nullifus Drawk, skold and punctographist.
The other was Sebastipole.
Both men bowed to the Lamplighter-Marshal and the senior officers.
Rossamünd could not imagine the leer and lamplighter's agent as the stripe of person who
would actually want a monster-blood tattoo. It shocked him to see Sebastipole standing before
his comrades calmly rolling up his shirt's white sleeve, waiting to be marked. Rossamünd thought
he glimpsed at least one other cruorpunxis showing from under the rolled cloth.
As Sebastipole sat, Nullifus Drawk addressed the room, crying, "Officers, lighters, foot
soldiers, clerks! It has been decided that Josclin and Sebastipole do share the distinction of
slaying the mighty Herdebog Trought, that the falseman's aim did play its part as much as the
scourge's potives. Yet as our brother Josclin is lying broken but well mending in the infirmary, it
will be, as you can see, our goodly agent Sebastipole who will gain his prize tonight."
Nullifus Drawk took up a guillion needle and a small disc-headed orbis. Dipping the point of
the guillion into a beaker of the Trought's cruor, he referred to a small notebook that lay open on
the table and found his place on Sebastipole's bare arm. There he began to gently yet rapidly
strike the broad, blunt end of the needle, tap tap tap. The hall was profoundly silent as each
observer savored the marking of yet another victory over the monstrous foe.
Fixated yet appalled, Rossamünd was convinced that Sebastipole was not enjoying this
spectacle. He was certain that, as when he put on his sthenicon, the leer found the puncting
distasteful. Yet truly, disappointingly, Rossamünd knew it could not be so. "Like chasing after
Phoebë," Verline would have said — wishing after impossible things: a leer's job was to seek, to
find and, inevitably, to join in the killing of monsters. Could he be what Rossamünd considered a
good man and still do this? Could a man be wrong for doing what he thought was right?
Threnody showed sympathy neither for the monster nor the men. By his other side he six
watch-mates gingered their bandages beneath their coats, impatient for the punxis to be healed
and tattoos ready to show away.
Tap tap tap. Drawk hammered lightly with his guillion, dipping frequently into the cruor
dabbing at the stippled place on Sebastipole's arm with thick pledgets. The leer sat stiff and still,
never flinching. For a week or two the mark would be invisible other than a suppurating scab,
which would finally slough off and reveal the craftily formed image. And so they all watched till
the honor was done, then gave a rousing cheer.
Stepping regular at the rear of the file, Rossamünd was grateful to leave the closeness of the
Hall of Pageants, which was almost toxic with the exhalations of a crowd and the heavy musk of
monster. Breathing deeply of the clean frosty night, he resolved never to see another puncting as
long as his days had span.
Dismissed, Rossamünd hurried with the other prentices past the Dead Patch, some of them
distracted by a collection of lighters, pediteers and laborers gathering around a tree by the lamp at
the top of the Postern Stair.

Threnody pulled at his arm, their earlier conflict clearly forgotten. "Come," she said as she
dragged him toward the inquisitive group.
Rossamünd resisted. "It'll be douse-lamps any minute. We have to go to our cells."
"By the dove's wings! Something interesting in this regulation-strangled den of boredom and
you want to go night-nights?" She yanked at his sleeve and pulled him over to the tree. This
trunk was a common place for public messages to be fixed, and against the tatters of older bills,
rotten and moldy and mostly illegible, a large new bill had been posted. Taking the risk of being
late, Rossamünd squeezed between the lampsmen and pediteers and their muttered complaints
and stood with Threnody before the proclamation. It read:

"Elsegood brought this'un up from the Nook," said Assimus to his colleague and the world in
general. "Bills just like this here one are all about the Sulk End and the Idlewild, he says, even
down in Winstermill and maybe over the Gizzard in Brandenbrass and Fayelillian and even down
in Doggenbrass."
"Aye," coughed an old corporal-of-musketeers, "inviting all manner of violent, adventurous
foringers to the manse — to our home." The man looked the type to consider anyone not from
Winstermill a ‘foringer.’
"There's another one of these just been handed about the officers' mess," growled a
haubardier. "We can handle the baskets. Don't need no outside hesitance, thanks all the same.
The Marshal'll keep it all in hand."
"So ye say, Turbidius," countered the corporal, "but ye have to give that it's been a cram-full
of theroscades unchecked these last couple o' years, particularly this year, and most particularly
this winter. The Marshal ain't kept that all in hand — it be his name on the bill, bain't it? He's the
one admitting to needing help."
Assimus ground his teeth. "And if ye was buried under a mountain of paper and chits such as
our Lamplighter-Marshal be these few years, then I beg to suggest ye might be needing some help
too!"
Rossamünd was, more than anything, boggled at the idea of the manse full of teratologists in
all their weird gaudery. As people moved on to their business, a notion dawned on him. Maybe
Europe will be coming? Reading the bill closely, he did not doubt that her ‘thew’ would be
sturdy enough, though he wondered if her ‘repute’ might be fine enough. She would have been
finished in Sinster by now, surely. The thought of her returning into his life made Rossamünd
feel strange. He was apprehensive yet oddly hopeful.
"I don't know why the Emperor don't send us some more lighters from them kinder highroads
like what's down in the Patricine — like the Conduit Axium or the Bridle," continued the
corporal.
"Aye, or reinforce us with a battalion o' musketeers or such," some other voice put in. "He's
got more'n enough to spare with all his armies up in the Seat and down in the Alternats."
"Aye, well, the Emperor's too busy using them same musketeers to fight with our hereward
neighbors and has none to spare us in our troubles."
Rossamünd had some notion of the wars being fought to the west of the Empire with the
princes of Sebastian and the landgraves of Stanislaus and Wenclesaus. This was an age-old
struggle with the sedorner-kings that lived just beyond the grasp of the Haacobin Dynasty,
accused of traffic with the monsters and worthy of annihilation. Centuries had gone and still
these realms had refused to be subdued.
"Ye'd think our most Serene Highness might reckon it more important to fight the nickers
nigh on his doorstep," that other voice put in.
"Aye, and ye'd think it wouldn’t be much use conquerin' some other folks for loving the
nickers when your own home is overrun with 'em!" the corporal concluded. "Don't he know how
tough we've got it?"
With a corporate grumble of agreement people retired for the night.
"Listen to them mew about how hard it has been! What do they know?" Threnody growled as
the crowd thinned. "My sisters have been stretched to exhaustion for years defending the people.
These grot-headed lightermen don't know to recognize an ally when they they've got one!"
Close by a sparrow flitted through the dark from one withered conifer to the next,
disappearing into the foliage to twitter from its covert. With a last sharp tweet, it burst out and
dashed away, followed by its mate, going southeast up across the roofs of the Low Gutter to
disappear over the wall.
"Those things are uncommonly active of a nighttime," Threnody remarked. "Maybe they're
watchers for the Duke of Sparrows..."
Rossamünd started. How does she know of the Duke of Sparrows? He turned to stare where

the bird had flown to hide his surprise. Were they truly being watched? "How can you know
that?" he asked.
"I have heard Dolours say an urchin-lord dwells in the Sparrow Downs," the girl said smugly,
clearly pleased to get a reaction out of him. "The Duke of Sparrows, who she says watches over
things and keeps other bogles at bay."
"What would the Duke of Sparrows have to watch in here?" Rossamünd marveled aloud, his
sense of the lay of things shifting profoundly.
"Who can know?" Threnody replied dismissively. "We can't even be certain such a creature
exists. Oh, never-you-mind, lamp boy. Dolours is often quietly telling me things like that:
enough to make some people cry Sedorner! " She finished with an untoward shout.
Rossamünd looked about in fright.
"But I'm not one of those mindless folk," Threnody concluded, "whateer Mother might insist."
"Is that why Dolours did not kill the Trought?" Rossamünd said in the smallest whisper.
With a start, Threnody stared at him. "What do you mean, lamp boy?" she demanded.
"I — I would have reckoned she could slay it with one thought, but she just seemed to drive it
away—"
"How would you know what the Lady Dolours can and can't do?" Threnody stood tall and
arrogant.
"Well — I —"
"Bookchild! Vey!" Demanded Benedict from the step of the Sally. "Inside at the double!
Get to confinations afore the lamplighter-sergeant sees you!"
I hope the Duke of Sparrows does exist, thought Rossamünd as he obeyed the under-sergeant.
The notion of a benevolent monster-lord out there seeking to help humans and not harm them was
almost too good to be possible.

13
An Unanswered Question
caladines (noun) also aleteins, solitarines or just solitaires; calendars who travel long and far from their clave
spreading the work of good-doing and protection for the undermonied. The most fanatical of their sisters, caladines
are typically the most colorfully mottled and strangely clothed of the calendars, wearing elaborate dandicombs of
horns or hevenhills (inordinately high thrice-highs) or henins and so on. They too will mark themselves with
outlandish spoors often imitating the patterns of the more unusual creatures that their wide-faring way may have
brought onto their path.

B

y the new week all manner of teratologists began to fetch up at Winstermill, braving the
unfriendly traveling weather for the prospect of reward — an Imperial declaration always held the
promise of sous at the end. There were skolds and scourges, fulgars and wits, pistoleers and
gangs of filibusters and other pugnators. Some appeared alone, others brought their factotums,
and a few swaggerers were served by a whole staff of cogs — clerks and secretaries and other
fiddlers of details. There came too the learned folk: habilists and natural philosophers, with their
pensive expressions and chests of books. Even peltrymen — trappers and fur traders — answered
the call. Bloodless and severe, they arrived from all the wooded nooks, lured from their own
perilous labors by the lucrative promises. Every one of these opportunists and sell-swords would
come there by foot, by post-lentum, by hired caboose, by private carriage, and stay for a moment
and no more than a night, just long enough to gain a precious Writ of the Course. This Imperial
document was a guarantee of payment that gave the bearer the right to claim head-money for the
slaughter of bogles.
With all these came the usual motley crowd of hucilluctors, fabulists, cantebanks and clowns,
pollcarries, brocanders selling their secondhand proofing, even wandering punctographists.
Peregrinating, posturing upstarts were coming and going and milling about the manse, some
foolishly camping near the foot of the fortress on the drier parts of the Harowmath. More a
nuisance than a novelty, they soon found themselves firmly encouraged to shuffle on to other
places.
Yet it was among the teratologists, of course, that Rossamünd discovered the most unusual
folk of all. Once in a while there arrived a person dressed in the likeness of an animal or a bird,
or monster even; and wherever these animal-costumed folk went and whatever they did, they
went and did in dance. He recognized something of their prancings in the two calendars who had
fought in the Briarywood. At limes, between fodicar drill and evolutions, a pair of these slowly
spinning, skipping teratologists danced through the gates on foot, costumed as cruel blackbirds.
"What are they, Threnody?" Rossamünd stared at these, fascinated.
She looked at him as if he were the dumbest boy on watch. "Sagaars, of course!" she
answered contemptuously.
Rossamünd stayed dumb.
Threnody narrowed her eyes and wagged her head. "With all those pamphlets you read one
would think you'd be sharper, lamp boy, she continued with a huff. "Sagaars live to be dancing
all the day long — some even try it in their sleep — and while they dance they kill the nickers
with venomous theromoirs. Several serve my mother and the Right."
"Like Pannette and Pandomë?"
Threnody hesitated, closing her eyes. "Yes," she whispered, "like Pannette and Pandomë."
As these pugnators pranced proud and upset much of the manse's rhythm, the little varying
schedule of prentice life remained. So it went, day come and day go, till Rossamünd was sure the
whole of the east must be squeezed full with the monster-wrecking bravoes. As opportunity

allowed, he would carefully and keenly review the arrivals, hoping — daring not to admit he
hoped — to spy a flash of a deep scarlet frock coat with flaring hems. He could not rightly say
why he was so keen to see Europe: he had known her only for the short side of a week, and she
was the epitome of deeds he found very hard to reconcile. Regardless, he missed her. Yet with
such frequency of arrivings and leavings, such a plenitude of lahzars, Europe, the Branden Rose,
was never among them.
*

*

*

*

*

By the middle of the week something finally did break the prentice's routine. The morning
was clear and achingly cold; the cerulean sky flat, brilliant, puffed all over with clean white fists
of cloud rushed northwest by a whipping wind that was bringing fouler weather with it. The
prentices were out and swinging their fodicars about in a tidy and orderly manner, postilion horncalls an irregular, intermittent music. Teratologists and their attendant gaggles had been steadily
coming and going all day. Some would take a turn on the borders of the Grand Mead as they
waited for connecting posts or the resolving of kinds of paperwork.
It was limes, and the prentices were formed up and formally sucking on their bitter lemon
rinds and sipping tinctured small beer while Grindrod watched to make sure they swallowed it all.
This would normally be the time that a quarto would be returning from lighting, had the prenticewatches not been suspended. Rossamünd was considering paying a call on Numps at middens
when Benedict marched onto the ground.
The under-sergeant muttered for a moment with Grindrod, then summoned Rossamünd out of
file, to the surprise of all the lantern-sticks. Benedict wore an odd expression — somewhere
between bemusement and admiration — as he took the young prentice aside. "You have an
eminent visitor, prentice-lighter, and have been granted the time to spend with them," he said
officiously, adding in a friendly undertone, "and might I say you keep some odd and powerful
company, lad."
"Who—" Yet before Rossamünd could finish asking he smelled a welcome, well-known
perfume drift past. Heart pounding, he spun about. There, in all her healthy bloom, was Europe,
the Branden Rose, the Duchess-in-waiting of Naimes, the one who had saved him from a foul
end, the one he himself had rescued.
"Well hello, little man," she said in her silke voice, smiling, amused, maybe even happy to see
him. "Still fumbling your way through, I see."
"Hello, Miss Europe." He could barely manage a hoarse wheeze. It was such a strange
sensation to see her familiar face in these familiar precincts. Her hair was pinned up but without
the usual crow's claw hair-tine; her deep scarlet frock coat was of another style, made from some
kind of short-cropped hide — like the head of a new-barbered lighter — its glossy reds shifting
and mottled. Over this she wore a short black pollern-coat with broad collars and sleeves of
creamy-hued fur that was faintly spangled at its cuffs with darker spots. Her black boots were
trimmed with fur, which made a fuzzy hem at the top of each boot and protruded between the
buckles up the sides. This was Europe rugged against the cold.
Rossamünd did not know what to do with himself: some of him wanted to throw his arms
about her in sheer delight. The significant part — that part which governs in the end what we
really do rather than what we wish we might — was afraid. So he just stood and stared. "You've
come," he managed.
The fulgar raised an amused eyebrow. "So it would appear. I have come to knave myself to
these kind lamplighters and the citizens of the Placidia Solitus, in so desperate straits they send
their pleading bills all the way south to Sinster." Her face was straight but her voice amused.
"What's a kind-minded girl to do when such plaintive notes are sung?" She was in finer fettle
than of their last parting, rosy-cheeked with a shrewd twinkle in her eye. The surgeons of Sinster
must have done their infamous work well. "Tell me, little man..." Europe leaned forward a little.

Why did you not write me? Did you not miss me?"
"I thought you would be too busy to read any letter of mine, Miss Europe," Rossamünd
answered.
"Why, I do believe he blushes!" Europe laughed. "That young lady certainly watches us
keenly," she said, shifting subjects. "She knows you?"
Rossamünd looked and saw Threnody standing alone on Evolution Green, the other prentices
gone now, dismissed for readings. Her arms folded and her face shadowed under the brim of her
thrice-high, she was clearly paying Europe and Rossamünd pointed attention.
"Aye, Miss Europe, that's Threnody. She's a prentice like me." Rossamünd attempted a small
wave.
Threnody flushed, turned on her heel and marched away without a rearward look.
"A girl as a lighter — how intriguing. I think she might have set her heart on you, little man."
Rossamünd blushed deeper shades. "Hardly, miss! She's never happy with anything I say
and spends most of her time either ignoring me or huffing and puffing and rolling her eyes.
Besides which, she's older—"
Europe gave a loud peal of honest mirth. "My, my!"
At the start of the Cypress Walk, Threnody turned to the happy, incongruous sound, and
Rossamünd was sure she glowered.
Touching the corners of her eyes, the fulgar asked with a smile still in her voice, "And how
did she find her way here to vex you so?"
"She was a calendar before, but she has come here to get away from her mother."
Europe gave a wry smile. "I know how she feels," the fulgar murmured. "Mothers are best
fled... Now come along, little man, I have been granted the rest of the day with you by your
kindly Marshal. Let us get out of this cold." She handed him a small, beautifully wrapped parcel.
"It is just as well I brought this trifle for you. Your neck is bluer than a wren's."
Within the gaudy, fashionably spotted package was a magenta-red scarf made with fine twine.
"It's tinctured sabine," the fulgar explained airily. "You can only get it from this one little
fellow on the high-walks in Flint. It looks good on you — matches prettily with the harness."
Rossamünd was happily dumbfounded. Europe wanted to spend the day with him and she
had given him a present. When they had last parted company she had not said a word in final
farewell, nor even waved good-bye. Yet here she was seeking his company. He felt rather odd
following the fulgar with a present under his arm. Heads turned as she led him down along the
drive and through the coach yard: lentermen, postilions and yardsmen gazed, distracted,
habitually disapproving of her trade but heartily admiring her face and grace.
"I have sent the landaulet back to Brandenbrass." She chatted easily, oblivious to the stir she
was causing. "It was too much trouble to find both horse and driver at once. It will be a relief not
to have to fuss about stabling and repairs and thrown shoes. Let another worry about that..."
She led him up a steep flight of stairs to the guest billets. Like a small wayhouse, it lacked a
common room but had private rooms in its stead, and secluded dinner rooms as well as a lounge
for guests to receive guests of their own. This last was Europe's destination, a small, warm
apartment with comfortable chairs along each wall, thin windows looking out to the business of
coach yard and Mead below. A well-fueled fire crackled in the friendliest of ways in the corner.
Summoning refreshments, the Branden Rose took off her pollern and sat on a long tandem
chair, stretching out like a man, her back slouching, long legs crossed over at the ankles.
"So how is the life of a lamplighter turning for you?" she inquired complacently. "Still as
adventurous as that pawky postman made it out to be?"
Perching himself on the edge of the settee adjacent to the reclining fulgar, Rossamünd put his
hat beside him as his eyes roamed the room. "It has been mostly come and go and march and
stop, Miss Europe, and very little time for reading or thinking. But in the last couple of weeks
there have been two theroscades. I have also met a glimner called Mister Numps and delivered a
pig's head to our surgeon for the Snooks."

Europe fixed him with her sharp hazel gaze. "Tell me of these monsters attacking."
Refreshments arrived in the hands of a bobbing porter and Europe ordered food for the two of
them. As they waited Rossamünd recounted the two theroscades, starting with the horn-ed
nickers assaulting the carriage and the deeds of the calendars. "That is when Threnody joined
us."
"The girl lampsman who was so fascinated earlier?" Europe asked, oh so casually. "She is a
wit? "
"Aye, and she's the daughter of the calendars' august."
"My. How very impressive. The Lady Vey's progeny is a wit, a calendar and a lamplighter?"
Rossamünd ignored the sarcasm. "You know of her mother?"
"We have had occasion to meet, yes." The fulgar raised her hand as if to say that was all she
would tell.
Heeding this, Rossamünd pressed on with an account of the flight from the Herdebog Trought
and Bellicos' death, still so large in his memory. His telling was briefer, more subdued.
Europe sat a little straighter. "It is a... difficult thing to lose one you know to the wickedness
of some unworthy nickery basket," she said softly. "Do you wish you had become my factotum
after all?"
"I've wished a lot of things since being here, Miss Europe," Rossamünd demurred, "but I am
signed to serve as a lamplighter now and have been given the Emperor's Billion and all."
"So you choose to be stuck on one stretch of road for the rest of your days? What a waste."
The two of them looked at each other for a long moment until Rossamünd dropped his gaze.
"I don't want a life of violence," he said.
"You're living one now!" the fulgar retorted. "I tell you, child, this life is nothing but violence
— even if you do not seek it, others will bring it to you." She leaned forward and fixed him with
a terrible eye. "Do not make the mistake, Rossamünd, of living easy behind the feats of others
and all the while thinking yourself better for not joining the slaughter."
Cheeks burning from her rebuke, Rossamünd shrank back, confronted with how little he
know of this pugnacious woman.
"How can we not be violent when violence breeds in the very mud and makes monsters of us
all?" Europe persisted. "Stay here and you will be fighting just as you have been, always
fighting: if not with nickers then with men. What did you think a life of adventure was?" She
smiled condescendingly. "It is a life of violence. Come with me, and at least your foe will be
clear."
"Not all monsters are our enemies," Rossamünd insisted doggedly.
Europe regarded him with an unfathomable expression. "Truly?" she said eventually. "You
might want to shift yourself to Cloudeslee if you insist upon spouting talk like that. Sedorners get
short shrift in the Emperor's countries."
"But what about that poor Misbegotten Schrewd? He was just simple, not wicked, yet you
killed him all the same. And you wanted to slay Freckle when he had helped me. I could never
join you in that!"
Europe sat back, her gaze dangerously glassy, a threat in her tone. "Next you'll be telling me
those triply undone blightling were right for killing my dear Licurius."
"No!" he said quickly, eyes wide with horror. "I would never say that!"
There was a strained silence.
Europe sipped at a glass of deep red toscanelle and looked away. "You are a small and
ignorant urbanite; once you have lived and watched and been forced to such things as I have you
will not be so simple-headed."
Rossamünd could not collect his thoughts sufficiently to answer. He was right but so was she,
though he wished she was not. Mercifully they were interrupted by the arrival of meals.
For a time they ate and did not talk.
"Little man," Europe finally offered between bites, "tell me of this pig's head and that Snooks

fellow, the surgeon."
"Oh, the Snooks is not the surgeon, that's Grotius Swill—"
Europe stopped eating. "Did you just say Swill? Honorius Ludius Grotius Swill?"
"Aye." The young prentice stopped his chewing too.
"Hmm. I have heard of the man," the fulgar said gravely. "He has an evil reputation in Later
Sinster. What has he done to you?"
"Naught! I only took up the guts and head of a pig to him," Rossamünd explained, and told of
the attic surgery and the books and the flayed skin. "What is his reputation?"
"I heard that the fellow was caught dabbling in the darker habilisms and had traffic with folks
all but the most scurrilous butchers avoid. Rumor is a poor transmitter of truth, but it was said
that the Soratchë were becoming increasingly curious about his exertions."
Rossamünd frowned at this revelation. "The who, miss?"
"The Soratchë: they are a loose confederacy of those do-good calendar-kind keen on foiling
massacars."
"Is Swill a massacar, then?" Rossamünd gasped. "We should tell the Lamplighter-Marshal!"
Europe raised a calming hand. "There was much conjecture in Later Sinster, but nothing
proved. I am sure your kindly old Earl has things well in view. In such a tight place as this
fortress, genuinely nefarious deeds would be hard to hide."
Aye, but what if the fortress is not as tight as it should be? Rossamünd wondered. Even he
could tell the manse was creeping to disarray in the failing grip of the overworked marshallighter, a punctilious clerk-master and men so stretched that there were none left to plug the
breaches. Rossamünd shifted his thoughts. "Miss Europe?"
"Yes, little man?" the fulgar replied absently, taking out and chewing on a little rock salt.
"What was it like going to Sinster?" he asked. "What did you do there?"
Europe cocked her head and looked to him, a wry, energetic twinkle in her eye. "The journey
was brief," she said. "I left High Vesting the same day as you; took a fast packet down to Flint —
where the doughty crew discouraged a curious sea-nicker with their fine gunner and well-aimed
lambasts. Then a barge up the Ichabod and I was under the transmogrifier's catlin not more than
two weeks after I first met you."
"You saw a sea-nicker, miss?" Rossamünd's imagination ran with the image of a ram firing its
broadside at some enormous, marauding, eel-like thing with spines and needle teeth. He had
never seen a sea-nicker or a kraulschwimmen, nor any such creature — not for real — just poorly
executed etchings in his pamphlets.
"I actually saw very little of it but for a great amount of splashing and some distant
screaming," the fulgar answered. "I was directed to the seating deck soon after it appeared. It
was a close thing for a time, but the fast packet was truly that and we outran the beast in the end.
A good thing, for I do not think I would have been much help had the thing won its way aboard
us. Even if I had been at my best, the puddles and splashes on deck would have taken my arcs to
places they were not intended."
"Did the surgeon mend you?" Rossamünd pressed.
"Yes, he did." Europe straightened, rubbing her arm as if it ached. "I feel greatly improved.
He told me to keep to my treacle and it will be less likely for my organs to vaoriate in the future
as they did that night in the Brindleshaws." Bitterness returned briefly to her countenance.
"Vaoriate, miss?"
The horn of a post-lentum sounded, dulled by wall and window.
"Spasm," she said distractedly.
There was a hasty knock at the door. It opened and a porter put his head inside. "The post's
ready, m'lady. Do ye need yer bags lumbered out?"
Europe nodded and handed him a chit so he might retrieve her luggage from a stowage closet
below.
"Listen, Rossamünd, I am leaving on the last post today. I would sooner have you with me

than not — your flair for a good treacle is hard to forgo. Yet as you say, you have taken the
Emperor's Billion and a solemn oath on the day of joining. Imperial Service is not something that
can be put on then off again like some ill-tailored jackcoat. If you proved faithless in this, then
what trust could a girl put in you?" she said slowly, with deliberate calm. She stared at the floor,
lips pressed thin. "However, I wonder if you young prentices should not first be schooled in the
rotten core of the Empire you serve before being offered a shiny Emperor's Billion."
"A rotten core, Miss Europe?"
"Ask your Marshal, little man — he is more recently schooled in Imperial machinations than
I. Such things I escaped a long time ago." She paced out of the room without a rearward glance.
Down in the foreparts of the coach yard, the Branden Rose mounted the lentum ready to
depart for the Idlewild and the mysteries of the east. Standing on the highest step, she stared
darkly for a time at the spandarion rumpling in the fitful wind that moved above the battlements,
and at the house-watch that moved along them.
Below, waiting, Rossamünd watched her silently.
"I go to do my usual labors — find a nicker, kill a nicker," said Europe finally by way of
farewell. "I may be wintering at the Brisking Cat on the highroad at the Sourspan Bridge. If you
wish to write me, send to there and I shall get it either way."
"I will," the prentice answered. There was a pause. He wanted to say that he sometimes
regretted not taking up her repeated offer of work, yet could not think how. Moreover, after his
refusals such sentiments seemed a little late and a little foolish. Either way, he could never
willingly accept a living made through a perpetual, thoughtless slaughter of bogles.
Europe peered at him knowingly.
"Do not be troubled, little man," she said finally. "The last word is yet to be said on your
service: just because you begin along one way does not mean it will be your end. Go back
inside, Rossamünd. I will wait for thee, if thou wouldst come with me. Go back to your
lampsmen chums," she said as she entered the carriage. "And stay well clear of that Swill
fellow." The lentum door was shut with an impatient bang by the splasher boy.
"Good-bye, Miss Europe," Rossamünd called to her.
With a brash hoot of its horn the post-lentum was whipped on and took the Branden Rose —
still without a factotum — out of Winstermill. As suddenly as she had arrived, so she left.
Watching her depart, Rossamünd was caught in a collision of many emotions, but above them
all he felt as if he had been left behind.

14
The Undercroft
The Skillions the southeastern corner of the Low Gutter in the fortress of Winstermill. It gains its somewhat
derogatory name from the many small, wood-built single-story sheds, warehouses and work-stalls found there. These
are a recent addition to this part of the Gutter, it previously being the site of a stately old building designated for
multiple uses, including the growing of bloom and the making and storing of lanterns. This reputedly burned down
in mysterious circumstances two generations ago, outside of any current occupant's memory.

T

hough the menagerie of teratologists had begun to move into the Idlewild, disturbing
reports continued to arrive at Winstermill. One told of the cothouse of Dovecote Bolt east of the
Tumblesloe Heap that had lost three lamp-watchmen to an unseen ünterman. Another told of a
small band of nickers having the audacity to attack Cripplebolt near the farthest end of the
Wormway, destroying lamps in the process. For three days — the report said — they maintained
a kid of siege before relief arrived from the fortress of Haltmire.
The weather grew foul, either storming or foggy. Roads became nigh impassable. With the
continued monstrous threat to the Wormway, the regular merchants from the south became
reluctant to deliver. Only paying triple or quadruple the fair price for the essentials seemed to
make them willing to come up from Silvernook and High Vesting. Informed by the Master-ofClerks that the coffers could ill afford such prices, the Lamplighter-Marshal was forced to
introduce restrictions to the diet and habits of the manse. Starting with the prentices, the fortress
had been on short commons for the whole week. Rumors abounded of the clerks getting better
fare than the lighters, of certain well-to-do officers using private resources to purchase delicacies
for themselves but not share them about.
Worse yet, the lighters discovered during a wet and dismal pageant-of-arms that their
customary vigil-trip was canceled. The prentices were in foul spirits by the time they were
dismissed to loiter about the manse with little to occupy themselves. "Who does the Marshal
think he is, making us miss our stingos!" some of them grumbled. Small arguments broke out
between boys harboring worthless grudges. Other prentices bickered over their high-stakes card
games of lesquin and punt-royale, and cell row and mess hall became unbearable. Rossamünd sat
on an easy chair in the corner of the mess hall, regretting he had not gone with Europe. He had
been reading and rereading the same line in an already well-read pamphlet while beside him a
semantic spat between Smellgrove and a stock prentice by the name of Hapfauf revolved
endlessly. To Rossamünd's surprise Threnody sought him out and suggested they take a walk
outside despite the inclement weather. He took only a little convincing to go. He rugged his neck
with the scarf that Europe had given him and followed, Arabis giving him a sly wink as he exited.
Out into the biting squall they bravely ventured, clutching their regular-issue oiled pallmains
tightly about, heads bowed against the sleet, ducking involuntarily at the mighty cracks of thunder
that snapped above the Harrowmath. Having never owned a hat till he had left the foundlingery,
Rossamünd found them an absolute boon for keeping rain off the face. He could endure the
foulest weather if his dial was not being splashed and pelted with water.
"Who was that woman yesterday?" Threnody had found a small garden lean-to by the
vegetable patch and they were at least now out of the rain. "Was it truly the Branden Rose? It
certainly looked like it was. How do you know her?"
"Aye, it was. She and I met on my way here." It seemed a too-simple explanation. He
wriggled uneasily, trying to get comfortable atop a rather smelly sack that was digging into his
buttocks and dampening the seat of his longshanks.
"But how did someone like you meet someone like her?"

"Well," he said slowly, aware of how foolish he might sound, "the truth is that she found me
hiding in a boxthorn on the side of the Vestiweg."
"What in the Sundergird were you doing there? Hardly anyone travels that way — at least not
anyone in their right minds. It's just a supply road for the Spindle."
He told Threnody the story of his journey, beginning with the day Sebastipole had come to
select him. As he told it he was struck by the extraordinary nature of that adventure — had he
really done all those things and survived those dangers?
She leaned in close as he told his story, never interrupting, and when he had finished, she
stretched and let out a sigh. "Who'd have thought it, lamp boy? A stick like you fighting pirate
captains and, what did you call them? Grinnlings? And all the while that amazing woman is
feeding you whortleberries and letting you make her treacle?" Threnody's face was alight with a
deep, previously hidden enthusiasm. "I always have to make my own treacle. Mother has
drummed into me that you should always make your own — that way you know what is in it and
that it will work. But, oh! Tell me, what does a whortleberry taste like?"
Rossamünd opened his mouth to answer but the girl plowed on.
"I tell you, if I hadn't seen the Branden Rose talking to you I wouldn’t believe a lot of your
impossible story." She hesitated. "Is this all really the truth?"
"Of course it's the truth. She wants me to become her factotum!"
"You! " Threnody barked an incredulous laugh.
He scowled, wanting to say several things at once but saying nothing at all.
For a few moments they sat in silence together.
Threnody took out a vial of sticky red liquid. About to take a draught from it, she noticed
Rossamünd's scrutiny and said testily, "What do you goggle at, lamp boy? It's just Friscan's
wead. Have you never seen a girl drink her alembants before?"
Rossamünd gave a wordless splutter and quickly looked out to the sodden view.
"I should have been a fulgar." Threnody spoke softly after she had secreted the vial. "They
only need two treacles; did you know that? I have cartloads of potives to take. Wits need so
many different treacles and alembants at so many different times it's a wonder we do anything
else at all. If anyone needs a factotum, it's a wit." She glowered at the wintry garden patch, and
Rossamünd wondered what he was meant to say in reply. He had only rarely seen her take a sip
of her many draughts: a far greater variety of red and blue and black liquors, taken far more
frequently than Europe's.
"It does seem somewhat unfair..." he offered into her angry silence.
"And she gets to keep her hair."
"Well, you have kept your hair," Rossamünd remarked cautiously.
Threnody looked at him acidly, as if he had made a foul and tactless jest, then out at the
saturated roofs of the Low Gutter. Her expression was unfathomable. "Well, yes." She fiddled
absently with a raven curl. "I have..."
Rossamünd was beginning to regret coming out with her. He decided to try a different tack.
"I've met a man call Mister Numps—"
Threnody cut him off before he could finish his sentence.
"Of course, Mother does not think the Branden Rose is much good at all. In fact, she very
much dislikes her."
It was best to remain silent.
"But really, she and my mother have a lot in common."
Rossamünd waited. He could not fathom what these two women might share.
"They were at the sequestury in Fontrevault together when they were my age. The Branden
Rose was set to be a calendar, you know, except that she was expelled. I grew up hearing all
about her: about the scores of men that pursued her; about how she loves herself most of all.
Mother says she is an embarrassment to her state, her mother and her entire lineage, that if
Mother had such a proud heritage she would never carry on so." Threnody paused. "The

Branden Rose was the reason I so wanted to be a fulgar," she murmured, looking sadly at her
elegantly shod feet.
Between those revelations of Europe's mysterious past and Threnody's twists of mood,
Rossamünd could think of nothing to say. He looked dumbly out the open front of the lean-to to
the dripping garden. A damp sparrow, all puffed and ruffled, was sitting atop a bare stake sunk
deep in the moldy loam. It regarded him with definite, unsettling wisdom, as if it knew only too
well the trials of being a boy making sense of a girl.
"So this Mister Numps is a glimner living in the Low Gutter," Rossamünd tried again. "I'm
going there this afternoon. You could come if you want." He immediately regretted the
invitation.
Fortunately Threnody did not take him up on it, but stood and strode quickly to the doorway,
tossing her hair over her shoulder. "Have you even been listening to me at all?" she demanded.
"You would have to be the rudest, most ignorant boy I know!" And with that she left him.
Rossamünd blinked hard, frowned, took a breath. Verline had been much easier and a
thousand times more pleasant to be with than these bizarre, belligerent women. Rossamünd
might live till he was a thousand and still come no closer to understanding them. The sparrow
chirped cheekily and left with a whir of wings. The young prentice could have sworn it winked at
him before it vanished.
*

*

*

*

*

Middens was a desultory affair. No one seemed to know why or when, but the Snooks had
mysteriously departed Winstermill, and the new culinaire — hired particularly by the Master-ofClerks — did not possess the talent to make strict rations appetizing. The food was plain, the
smells were unsavory and the company was decidedly unhappy. While Threnody and Rossamünd
had been outside, Smellgrove and Hapfauf's disagreement had ended in blows, and with other
boys taking sides, half the prentices had earned themselves pots-and-pans. Now one side of the
hall was not speaking to the other side.
Threnody ignored Rossamünd utterly.
As soon as he could, Rossamünd took up his salumanticum and made his way down to the
Low Gutter to see Numps. After watching the man make his special seltzer he was hoping he
might learn a chemical trick or two from the glimner today. He was cold and damp when he
arrived but, once safe within the lantern store, he shook off his pallmain and left it and his thricehigh on a hook by the door to drip themselves dry. He was thankful to have his new scarf. One
of the detractions of seltzer light was that it gave no heat, and consequently the store was often
too cold.
"Hello, Mister Rossamünd," the glimner chuckled. "Chill's biting my feet today." He lifted
his legs to show spatterdashes buckled about his shins, his bare soles poking a little from the
bottom. Numps waggled his toes on his healing foot. "Numps' frosty feet are bitten with the
cold, but Mister Doctor Crispus says I can use them again."
Rossamünd grinned. "Afternoon, Mister Numps. Another day for furbishing the lanternlights?"
"Ahhh," Numps touched his handsome nose and chuckled again. He cupped his hand about
his mouth and whispered loudly to no one in particular. "I've got one on Mister Rossamünd. He
doesn't know it's not to be light-cleaning today, does he?"
For a moment Rossamünd thought the glimner was actually talking to some third person.
"What will we do today if we don't clean?" he asked.
The glimner just gave that merry little chortle in answer and stood. Wrapping himself in old
oiled canvas and secreting a bright-limn and a small, plump satchel beneath it, Numps made to
exit.
"Come along, Mister Rossamünd," he said softly and stepped outside, rain swirling in from

without. Putting his own dripping pallmain and hat back on, Rossamünd followed, thoughts
alight with puzzled wonder.
Producing the bright-limn to guide them, Numps took a left turn by the lantern store down
through a riddle of narrow alleys, another left, then a right and along an ill-cobbled lane with a
trickling drain that sneaked between the fortress wall and the black planking of a great storehouse.
Beneath the high eaves of the store, it was more like a tunnel, and so cramped they were forced to
walk sideways. Hammering rain found its way through splits and cracks to dribble from above.
Rats and other nervous skitterers stared from time-gathered detritus or scurried before them,
disappearing down unexpected gaps and grilles in the stonework on either side. While they went,
Numps gave sweet voice to brief nonsense songs about fish and frogs at a tea party, men wooing
milkmaids with whortleberry jam and some old general with a wooden leg and no army.
Creeping carefully, taking heed not to trip on the litter of planks, broken lamps, musket
stocks, various tins and pots half-filled with stagnant water or worse, wire spools, wire knots,
broken bottles and even a pile of unidentifiable bones, Rossamünd stayed behind the glimner.
Where is this place? he marveled, stepping over the remains of an older foundation, some
agglomeration of brick and stone and cement. They were clearly in a forgotten precinct of
Winstermill.
The tunnel-like lane ended abruptly, depositing them in a small, remote square where two
other cramped lanes and their drains joined and gurgled down a large, sunken grate. As clear of
debris as the lane was full, the square was surrounded on three sides by stone foundations and
wooden walls and on the fourth by the works of Winstermill's battlements. Weakly illuminated
through a drizzling opening between roof and wall, it felt as removed from the bustle of the
fortress as any haunted, lonely spot out in the wilds. Wind and rain wailed on high, lightning
crashed, but down here it was still; the bubbling waters and Numps' lilt the only tunes.
Pausing, Numps put a finger to his mouth, indicating quiet. They could have talked at volume
for all anyone would have heard. Bemused, Rossamünd nevertheless nodded, and clamped his
lips together for emphasis. Giving him the lantern, Numps crouched by the sunken grate and
reached down between its squared bars, grabbing at something on their underside. There was a
slight clank and the grate sprang up slightly, splitting in two like a gate. It was an entrance.
Stone stairs led down an arched tunnel into damp warmth and darkness. The water of the drains
did not pour directly into the hole revealed, but was caught in a gutter about the rim and
channeled into a pipe at one corner. The dark below smelled faintly familiar; the sweet salt of
seltzer blended with that almost-but-not-quite neutral odor of high humidity.
Without hesitation, Numps went down, encouraging Rossamünd to follow, pointing
downward. Rossamünd squeezed past and Numps closed the grate again and came after. "Down,
down, down we go," the glimner enthused, giving Rossamünd a gentle nudge.
As they went the din of wild weather above was dulled almost to silence. The prentice could
hear drops dripping steadily below, and occasional soft mechanical squeaks as well echoing up
the stone stairway. This stair went deeper than Rossamünd expected, down into what must have
been part of the structure of old Winstreslewe, the ancient bastion founded in Dido's time upon
whose ruined piles Winstermill had been raised.
The stair ended in a low undercroft of indeterminate size, its slate floor crowded with square
columns and arches of brick. Packed between each pillar were large, squat, square vats of
blackened wood. Some vats shone clean light to the low ceiling, others a verdant grassy green
and yet others showed little light at all. Together they lit the vast subfoundational space with soft
effulgence like an early, misty morning. The warmth here was peculiar: the close air tepid and
clinging. A tinkling music sounded in the dimness, made by the sporadic drizzle that formed in
the humidity and dripped from the rough ceiling into the vats.
"What is this place?" Rossamünd breathed, swinging the bright-limn about to shine on
Numps' face.
The glimner grinned in lopsided delight. "This is where the bloom is made," he whispered.

"Oh, where it used to be made, long, long before old Numps became poor Numps. This old
Numps and his old friend found these baths and we put some little bit of bloom from a broken
lamp in and we kept it alive till it grew to fill one bath and then the other bath and then the other
and then more baths still! I have kept them alive, all these times." Numps' smile became
sentimental, even paternal. "They're my special friends — like you and Mister Sebastipole and
Cinnamon. Look, go on — look inside." By the kindest pressure on Rossamünd's upper arm, the
glimner encouraged the prentice to peer inside a vat. "But be careful not to let the light shine in
too long, and stay quiet, ‘cause they like it still and dark and peaceful."
The black wooden vats had a girth of roughly twice the width of Rossamünd's cot and,
straining on his toes, the prentice could see that within was water or something akin to it, perhaps
a little greener. In this water was row on row of trailing plant-like growths, long horizontal
strands of a kind of submerged grass waving in its rippling bath.
Bloom! Rossamünd realized. Native, unsprung, inprismed bloom!
To most they would have been simply a plant; just some kind of dull, underwater weed;
boring old bloom: but to the prentice it was wonderful to see it growing freely, long and wild,
bushy and eagerly verdant. Puncheons of the stuff were sitting in most domiciles the land over,
stumpy, pruned sprigs ready to put into a bright-limn when the old had died. Here it was closer to
how it might be in its native dwelling, the littoral waters of southern mares.
Rossamünd stared for a long time, enjoying the deep echo of the drops, the faint trickling of
the rippling water set in motion by some unseen agent, watching the elongated tendrils swaying,
swaying, swaying in the green. It was a place of near-complete peace — a model of subterranean
calm.
"This is wonderful..." he breathed.
Numps beamed even as he took the bright-limn from Rossamünd's hand.
"Too much light," he explained, and sat down on a nest of hessian and hemp. "I come here
and the bloom trickle-trickle-trickles to me and gives me sleep and kind noises."
They sat for a time, both silent in this hidden undercroft of bloom baths.
"How does the rippling in the tubs happen?" Rossamünd asked at last.
Numps stood, leaned into the vat, shone the light within and said, "By the flippers flapping, of
course."
Rossamünd looked again and saw flat paddles waving slowly in the depths like the swimming
feet of an idling duck. Numps took him farther into the undercroft, threading past many more
baths than Rossamünd had first reckoned. In the midst of it all Numps halted and pointed with
open palm and a self-satisfied expression to a large brassbound wooden contraption. It was a
pull-box, a small kind of gastrine about the size of a limber. From its flywheel a series of wheels
and belts drove all the modulating paddles that set the tub water to gentle motion, squeaking
occasionally in their lazy to and for. Rossamünd could see the convoluted connection of the belts
all about the roof of the undercroft, one reaching down to the paddles of each vat.
"I feed it and muck it — and the bloom too, and keep it all running myself. No one else will."
Numps closed his eyes like a fellow foundling reciting verse in one of Master Pinsum's lessons at
the foundlingery. "Sometimes I put a little of one of my friends into a great-lantern that's to go
back out to the road, and these live and live and live much longer than the poor things they grow
otherwise."
In anyone else, this claim would be discounted as pure boast, but not with Numps; not with
such obvious proofs of his skill before them.
Rossamünd was powerfully impressed. "What do you feed the pull-box?"
"The cuttings and prunings and dead bits from the bloom," Numps returned matter-of-factly,
though a self-satisfied grin ticked at the unscarred corner of his mouth.
"What do you do with the pull-muck?"
Grin growing, clearly proud of himself, the glimner answered, "Feed it to the bloom. They
reckon it's the tastiest stuff they ever have tasted. They feed the pull, the pull feeds them — on

and on and on and on."
"Why aren't these used in all the lamps all the time?"
"Oh, they have their own blooms up there," Numps replied, "in tubs not so old and leaky nor
hard to get to. I always have to plug the cracks and gaps in this soggy wood." He patted the side
of a bath tenderly. "Besides, the master-clerker and all his clerker-chums wouldn't like a thing
like this. It's him who says where the bloom comes from nowadays."
Rossamünd stood and watched the entire mechanism in silent admiration, just listening to the
deep soothe of the trickling, rippling waters. "You'd have to be the best seltzerman ever there
was, Mister Numps!" he whispered.
"Ahh, not poor limpling-headed Numps," the glimner said bashfully, then grinned.
They sat then, side by side in the soporific warmth, the glimner and the prentice, Numps
humming, Rossamünd wishing heartily that he could come here again. Safe and warm and
brimming with peace, it was simply the best place in the whole Half-Continent. In the soft
darkness of the old forgotten bloom baths, Rossamünd slept.

15
The Way Least Went
Moss-light also know as a limnulin or limulight; this is a small, pocketable device, a simple biologue consisting of
a lidded box holding a clump of naturally phosphorescent mosslike lichens (either funkelmoos or micareen), set on a
thick bed of nutrient to keep it alive. This nutrient bed can be reinvigorated with drops of liquid similar to seltzer.
The light provided by a limnulin is not bright, but can give you enough to see your way right on a dark night, and is
diffuse enough not to attract immediate attention.

W

ith a panicked, convulsing suck of breath, Rossamünd awoke. He sat up in disoriented
fright, looking every way with hasty, sightless alarm as the swilling of water trickled all about.
Then easy realization brought peace: he was still in the undercroft, with the bloom baths.
Numps stirred more peaceably, saying sleepily, "Oh, oh, wake up, sleepyheads, no time for
dozing."
"What's the o'clock?" Rossamünd asked loudly, still a little mizzled.
Numps scratched his head. "Uh, sorry, Mister Rossamünd, I'm a glimner, not a night-clerk."
Rossamünd got to his feet. "It feels late," he said, and ran up the steps to observed the sky
through the grate. With profound consternation he discovered that the clear black dome of night
hung above. He could not quite believe it. His heart skipping several beats, he opened the grate
and clambered up to the square to get a better view. Maudlin green was riding high in the dark.
It was desperately, impossibly late. Douse-lanterns had come and was long gone and all prentices
should be in their cells asleep. No one was permitted to roam the grounds at night, especially not
some lowly lantern-stick. A quick trot to the jakes across the hall was all a prentice was allowed
during the night-watches. To be at large now was the worst breach, punishable by an afternoon in
the pillory by the Feuterer's Cottage.
Rossamünd leaped back down the steps, three at a time, utterly flustered, dreading the worst
punishments. "I'm late. I'm locked out. Frogs and toads, Mister Numps! How am I to get back
into my cell?"
Numps was still sitting as the prentice had left him.
"I have to go right now, Mister Numps." Rossamünd's voice quavered with anxiety. "It's past
douse-lanterns... Oh, I'm in so much trouble..."
"Oh — oh — um, oh dear — there's better ways home again." Numps nodded. Numps'
hiding-hole goes more places than just here." With that he stood and jogged off through the
baths.
Rossamünd followed.
Through the convoluted clearances between the battery of baths they hastened. In the farthest
corner of the undercroft was a hole in the wall, round like a drain. Upon a hook at the apex of the
drain's arch hung a bright-limn with the healthiest looking bloom Rossamünd had ever seen
glowing bright in its near-clear seltzer. Beyond the throw of clean light the cavity of the drain
was exquisitely black and blank and mysterious. Numps took the bright-limn off its stay and,
with a solemn nod to Rossamünd and a soft "shh," entered the round gap.
Close behind, the prentice saw that they were in a tunnel, most probably an ancient sewer
pipe. On left and right down the length of the tunnel they passed the small dark mouths of lesser
pipes beady with reflecting retinas and echoing with light patters and rodent squeaks. The graymousers that haunted the manse could grow happily fat down here.
In this moldy, claustrophobic place Rossamünd's sense of distance began to distort, and with
it time. To him it felt that they had walked far enough to be somewhere out on the Harrowmath.
Several times the tunnel kinked and branched till Rossamünd was disoriented and very glad that

the glimner knew the way. Numps finally took a right turn and they began to descend. The new
way was of greater diameter than the previous drain and took them down so sharply that
Rossamünd was made to lean backward with the effort of climbing, scrabbling at the slimy bricks
to prevent a slip.
Lifting the bright-limn high, Numps paused when the tunnel became level again. "We are
right under the manse-house," the glimner said, looking up and ducking his head.
Looking to the immuring bricks just above, Rossamünd shrank a little at the thought of the
great press of masonry, the tons of stone and hundreds of sleeping lighters and staff all on top of
him. It was so deep not even the vermin ventured here.
Shouldn't we be going up? Rossamünd fretted.
Numps continued forward, and there, by an intersecting pipe was a small door of corroding
iron a few feet above the floor, reached by three large steps. He grinned at Rossamünd, his
geniality made ghastly by the play of seltzer light on his scars. Rossamünd smiled back, alive to
the immense trust the glimner was showing him, the secrets the man was revealing.
"Through here now, and up, up, up," Numps said softly. He produced a key pulled from
somewhere on his person, unlocked the rusty door and shone the seltzer light through. Beyond
was the landing of a tight stairway of near-failing timbers, rising into shadows of architectural
gloom.
Another fustigrade!
Unlike the one reached through the kitchens, this was not lit at all.
How often does he come here? Rossamünd's whole sense of Winstermill shifted with the
thought of the glimner wandering about beneath them as they labored, ate, even slept.
Numps stood by the door, waiting.
"Mister Numps?"
"I don't like to go up to the manse." The glimner's face was drawn and gray, his eyes
animated with deep troubles. "I won't go any farther — oh dear no; I don't like it in the manse...
never have."
"Can I find my own way from here?" Rossamünd asked.
The glimner clucked his tongue. "Mister Rossamünd can indeed go himself."
"What more is ahead?" the prentice asked.
Numps looked to the furtigrade distractedly. "Oh — oh, more tunnels, more stairs: just go up
— up — up — do not stop at any doors until the very top and turn the bolt and slide the door,
down the passage and through the hole and you shall come out on to the lectury floor."
A start of panic knotted in Rossamünd's innards. "Are you sure?" he pressed.
Numps nodded emphatically. The glimner had led him a long and twisted way but now he
must go ahead alone — to a place that might not lead anywhere. I could be lost or found out late!
— between the stone and the sty, as Fransitart would say. I found my way to Winstermill and I
can do this too.
Stepping onto the tiny landing, Rossamünd looked up. He could see only a few flights above,
beyond which darkness brooded. He listened: he could hear nothing but his own workings
beating, lub-dub lub-dub.
"You must go gently-gently," said the glimner. "Some others are up here too, all awandering. I hear them sometimes down here but they don't hear me. Oh no." He took
something from his satchel and pressed it into Rossamünd's hands. "Here, Mister Rossamünd,
take this; it's too dark up there." It was a small pewter box, like those is which pediteers carried
their playing cards, but this had a thick leather strap attached and felt almost empty. The prentice
did not know what to say.
"It's a moss-light," Numps explained. "Push — push at the top."
Rossamünd did as instructed. The top panel proved to be a lid that, when slid up, exposed a
diffuse blue-green glow within. With a closer look he found the box was hollow with a glass top,
and stuffed with a bizarre kind of plant, its tiny leaves radiant with that odd, natural effulgence

like bloom.
"So you will find the way." Numps blessed Rossamünd with his crooked smile once more.
"Oh, thank you, Mister Numps." Rossamünd felt a small relief: at least he would see his way
— even if he was not certain where that way would lead him.
"Go, go," Numps bobbed his head bashfully. "Up up to the top, slide the door, through the
hole and off to bed just like me. Bye, bye..." Mumbling, he shuffled back along the reverse of
his path.
By the eerie nimbus-light of Numps' gift, Rossamünd began to climb the furtigrade. It was
steep, of course, and so very cramped he was obliged to climb slowly. Heeding the warning that
the glimner had given of others above, he worked hard to make his footfalls light and prevent the
flimsy stair from creaking. Three flights and still the furtigrade went on. At the fourth the
looming shadows resolved themselves into a doorway, but the stair went on. No stopping at any
doors, Mister Numps said. Rossamünd continued to climb. His ascent was soon foiled, however.
Not more than another two flights higher he discovered to his great dismay that a part of the stair
had collapsed, making a wreck of gray splinters that made the furtigrade impassable. He could go
no farther. What now? His mind's cogs raced. I'll try the door I saw below.
Rossamünd crept down to this door, the glow of the moss-light muffled against his chest, and
listened: nothing but drips and the rush of his heart. He dared a little more light and peered
gingerly beyond the doorway. The floor of the space was a mirror of the ceiling, a broad shallow
drain that formed a vaulted junction with three other tunnels. Forward or back he was lost, he
figured, but back meant certain discovery and the pillory while forward at least held a chance of
undetected return. So forward it is...
He had heard somewhere — probably from Master Fransitart — that when caught in a maze
you should always go left and eventually you would win free. Taking a deep breath he went left.
If this did not work he would simply return and choose again.
Rossamünd followed the leftward tunnel and it took him farther and farther from the junction,
finally terminating in eight steps that led up to a brick wall. A dead end! But there, hammered
into the mildewed bricks with corroded pegs of iron, was a crude ladder. Hanging the moss-light
by its strap about his neck, the prentice scuttered up and pulled himself through into a tight valley
in the masonry that smelled of century-settled dust and stillness. Brittle twig-weeds sprouted
from any suggestion of a crack between floor and wall. How they managed to live at all down in
this subterranean night he did not know.
Leftward was blocked by a wall, and so Rossamünd went right. In the meager moss-light, he
thought he could discern what looked like the blank sockets of windows high in the walls above.
Soon this architectural chasm ended bluntly in a redbrick barrier fronted by yet another furtigrade
going up and going down. Up was closer to Winstermill, he reasoned, so he began to wearily
climb again.
The night was never going to end!
I should never have come this way. I should have knocked on the Sally door... or even the
front door.
Becoming used to this creeping dark, he took the ascent a little more confidently, but the stair
soon reached its end. At its summit he was confronted with a wall into which was sunk and
oblong trap-hole, about his height and nearly an arm's length deep. It was blocked by a stained
panel of dark rusted iron fixed with a corroded handle and barely held shut by a sliding bar of
wood and iron. Rossamünd tried it in hope, and the flaking metal resisted at first but then slid
back with a loud crack. Maybe this is the door Numps was thinking of... He tugged, and the door
did not shift. He shoved with hearty frustration, and in a small burst of rusting dust from its ageblackened hinges the portal bulged inward — just a little. Through this crack was a glimpse into
blackness, and from it exhaled the foul odor of decay, so much like that far worse hint he had
once detected in the hold of the Hogshead. In the bowels of the cromster it had been heavily
masked with swine's lard, but here it was full and oppressively potent, smothering him in its dread

stink.
A rever-man! he intuited, stepping away from the door. Down here? But how? He could
not believe it.
There was a sound, some nondescript evidence of motion; a step, a shuffle — Rossamünd
could not tell, but he knew something moved behind that stubborn-hinged door.
I must try another way! He reached for the handle of the panel to shut it.
Some misshapen thing lurched at the space from the black within. Pallid hands, blotched and
scabbed, gripped door and post and wrenched powerfully. Metal groaned, wood buckled and the
door-gap widened. A pale head thrust through, craning and twisting right, then left, its spasmodic
breath coming in a quivering wheeze. Its toothy, lipless mouth seeped saliva, at which it sucked
almost as often as it breathed. The abominable creature twisted about and fixed its callous
attention on him, pinning him with its morbid fascination. With a white flash of dread he realized
this was a gudgeon. Here truly was a rever-man — uncaged, unfettered, dreadfully free.
Rossamünd bit back a scream. His innards churned. His thoughts wailed. A rever-man! A
rever-man here in Winstermill!
For a breath Rossamünd's mind was overthrown as he tottered back, struggling to fathom
what he saw. Yet with the cold, radiating dread that cried Run! Run! In a tiny, terrified voice
within came a wholly unexpected rage. Faced now with a rever-man, a blasphemously madething, uncaged and visible, Rossamünd's terror did not overcome him. His hand went
instinctively to his salumanticum and found the Frazzard's powder.
The gudgeon shifted its grasp. Tiny little piggy eyes regarded him coldly — soulless, dead —
as slowly, inexorably the panel-door was forced open. Large, furry, inhuman ears swiveled and
twitched at either side of its long and bulging skull. Swathes of filthy bandages and even a rope
were wrapped about its trunk, keeping its heaving chest and stitch-grafted abdomen together.
What struck Rossamünd most was the utter absence of any threwd about the thing. A threwdless
monster: how could you ever tell it was coming? Indeed, it was devoid of even a flicker of real
vitality: a man-made thing, a dead thing. Yet its full and putrid reek, unmasked by swine's lard,
was potent. The gudgeon opened its slavering mouth and a long tongue like a lizard's lolled
obscenely, flicking in the dusty air. Even as Rossamünd stumbled backward onto the furtigrade
and down the way he had come, the abomination stared with hungry curiosity as the crack
between door and wall grew ineluctably wider.
"Hmm," it seethed, licking at the gap between it and the prentice, "yooouuu mmake mmeee
huuunnngreee..."
With one powerful spring, the made-monster flung itself through the gap, viper-quick, at
Rossamünd, slamming into the balustrade as it made pursuit.
Tripping, nearly falling, Rossamünd blundered down the stair. The gudgeon staggered and
turned with a dry, rattling hiss. On the lower landing Rossamünd twisted and flung the potive at
it as it pounced at him from on high. His aim was as true at a natural throw as it was off with a
firelock. The Frazzard's powder bust against the creature's neck and shoulder with a flash of
bluish sparks and a series of tight detonations that sounded like the popping of corks.
"Aaiieeee!" The creature hit the wooden steps with a crash and tumbled into Rossamünd as it
fell. A thousand stars erupting across his senses, the prentice was crushed over and over between
wooden step and rever-man. Together they toppled a whole other flight, then another, striking the
banister rail on the lower landing hard, causing it to crack dangerously.
The gudgeon was on him in an instant, pressing him down, its whelming stench all about him,
teeth snapping clack! clack! Seeking to nip at exposed flesh: fingers, knees, cheeks. In white,
blind terror Rossamünd heaved the abominable creature off and shoved it — almost threw it
though it was twice his size — across the tiny landing. Free of its imprisoning bulk, he sprang up
the stairs he had just descended so painfully, pointlessly crying, "Help! Help!"
"Ahhh! Yoouuu liiittle beeeast!" he heard it hiss behind him. The rever-man was fumbling
about on hands and knees, its piggy little eyes burned out by the Frazzardian chemistry. The

distinct peppery-salty smell of the spent potive spiced the close fug of the furtigrade. "I caaan
stiiill heeeaaarrr yoouu..."
The gudgeon shuffled toward Rossamünd and he turned to face it, scuttering up each step
upon his bottom.
It made a strange cackling. "I could eeeat yoouuurrr kiiind aaall the looong looong daayyy!"
It sprang catlike at what it believed to be Rossamünd's position, and struck the banister three steps
below the prentice with enough force to smash the rails to flinders, which toppled down into the
darkness. Nothing could stop the gudgeon. It bounced off the ruined wood, its arm a spasming
dead weight, the left shoulder dislocated and deformed by the blow — the vile creature was so
utterly ravening it was destroying itself to get to him. It pounced again.
Rossamünd kicked out with all the might his horror could muster — and missed. The
unhallowed thing gripped his flailing leg and bit at his skin, a bite meant to tear away muscle. Its
crooked teeth met proofed galliskins, cruelly pinching flesh against bone but failing to penetrate.
Once again Rossamünd had been saved by the wonders of gauld. With a yelp, he lashed with his
free leg, striking the putrid thing upon its face. The gudgeon must not have been well knit, for its
jaw gave way with sickening ease under his boot-heel; teeth sprayed and clattered about the stair.
The cobbled-together thing gurgled and shrieked and sought to grasp Rossamünd in a death grip.
Kicking again, the prentice got his footing and bounded up the stairs.
Below, the gudgeon was hissing and sucking through its mangled mouth, struggling once
again up the furtigrade seeking nothing but gory murder, utterly heedless of its broken parts.
Rossamünd extracted another salpert of Frazzard's powder. Oh, for something more deadly!
Yet he did not dare use the loomblaze for fear it would cause the dry, dusty furtigrade to take fire,
and start an unstoppable conflagration right within the foundations of the manse. He threw the
potive hard on the step before the gudgeon, seeking to make a brief barrier, to give the
abomination second thoughts. The potive popped and crackled as it erupted and sprayed the
gudgeon again. With its cries of rage oddly flat and muffled in the squeeze of the dusty
furtigrade, Rossamünd dashed up the stairs, pain jarring up his bitten shin.
The foul thing was staggering up after him — he could see it through the frame and rails —
eyes fizzing, weeping gore, utterly ruined by two doses of Frazzard's powder, jaw a crooked
mass, mouth dribbling unstoppably. There was something almost pathetic about this abominable
creature with its terrible injuries, yet it did not heed its damage. With long, clumsy reaches o fits
arms, the gudgeon slapped its hands of an higher step, felt the way and pulled itself up, gaining
pace. There was no escaping the thing. Rossamünd could only try to flee up the furtigrade and
out into the unknown cavities of the vault above.
"Help!" he cried, a small pathetic sound in this claustrophobic fastness.
The gudgeon slunk around the landing below, starting up the very stair he was upon. It
jabbered at him incomprehensibly, trying to form vile taunts with its broken, dribbling maw.
"Help!" Rossamünd bellowed again. He knew it was hopeless, but sanguine hope kept him
crying.
He set his feet on the creaking boards of the tiny landing by the wrenched door, giving
himself a little space to fight from, and seized a caste of loomblaze from his salumanticum. He
had to risk it or perish. Rossamünd watched the ill-gotten thing climb, and waited. Waited till it
was close enough.
"Whhyyy-bbll-ssooo-blbb-ssstiiilll-blbl, littlbblle-bbl-mooorsel-bbl," the horror drooled and,
despite blindness, gathered itself to pounce.
With a terrorlike wail, Rossamünd leaped down the stairs and grappled the foul creature once
more, hitting the banister rail as they collided, wrenching it with an ominous crack. The gudgeon
tried to pound at him, but Rossamünd was in close, too close for its swings to be effective. It
thumped at his shoulders, pushing him down beneath its wrath. He gagged and spat bile. Yet as
it smothered him, the prentice gripped the gudgeon about its festering neck and shoved the caste
of loomblaze down into the foul, broken mouth, right into its crop. The gudgeon tried to chew off

his hand, its broken jaw doing little more than a gory flapping. It wrapped its tongue about
Rossamünd's wrist and with groping, gripping hands sought to gouge at the prentice's face.
Straining and twisting his head, Rossamünd wrenched himself loose and away, bringing his arm
back sharply to chop at the creature's throat, where the frangible vial had lodged. At the second
blow the gudgeon gave a convulsing, gargling shriek: a half-human, piglike squeal. Yellowgreen gouts of light flared from its mouth and nostrils as the loomblaze erupted within its neck. It
writhed and arched its back, still screaming as Rossamünd kicked it away and fumbled for safety
on higher steps. He watched in horror as the burning rever-man toppled against the already
weakened rail. It gave way and the beast plummeted through the thin gap about which the
furtigrade wound, shattering the rail below; falling, colliding and falling again a score of times
more than Rossamünd could follow, before abruptly halting, a small bright fire in the darkest
depths below.
Laboring for breath, shin a torture, his mind's eye revisiting the horror over and over in a
giddy spin, Rossamünd pulled himself away from the edge of the gap. He shook himself, stood,
and on wobbling legs went as fast as he could down the furtigrade, terrified that some other
revenant-beast might be waiting for him above. Far down the dangerously shuddering stair,
deeper still, he could see the dying flicker of the loomblaze burning. The frame of the furtigrade
began to crack and sag, the age-rotten wood not able to support such rough use. Back at the
walled valley he leaped from the tottering stair and ran, legs still shaky, back the way he had
come, finding the original four-way vault. Going left again he pushed on, listening always for
sounds of pursuit, another caste of loomblaze ever ready in his grasp. So intent was he on
knowing if he was followed he took little notice of the perpendicular twists and the turns,
choosing left when he could, going either up or down with an instinct born of desperation. If he
hit a dead end he would simply turn about and take the next left, eyes wide as wide could be, ears
pricked for any wheezing or shuffling of a gudgeon in pursuit.
Driven by the nauseating urgency to be free of this crowding, dusty labyrinth, Rossamünd
pushed on through more and more cramped passages and buried, forgotten rooms. Stumbling
dizzily several times, he had no notion of how long or how far he had come, but at some point the
way became straighter and the architecture familiar. At the top of a solid flight of stone steps he
stopped in front of a door with a very ordinary-looking handle in it, just like those on the doors of
the manse. Excited, he tugged. The door resisted at first, but after a determined pull it opened
with a clatter. The relief was powerful, hysterical. Rossamünd sprang out, all sense of decorum
abandoned. "Raise the alarm!" he hollered. "A rever-man! A rever-man!
And there, on the other side, he found himself staring directly at the shocked face of the
Master-of-Clerks.

16
The Lamplighter-Marshal
Telltale(s) falseman retained by one of office or status to inform their employers of the veracity of others'
statements or actions, to signal if fellow interlocuters are lying or dissembling or masking the truth in any other way.
If they could afford to, most people of any prominence would employ telltales, but there simply are not enough
falsemen to fill so many vacancies. This means that a leer can earn a truly handsome living as a telltale. Then there
are those honorable few who do it simply because it is their job and responsibility. Despite this rarity, many of the
prominent work hard to nullify the advantage a telltale will give, either by employing their own falseman, or having a
palliatrix (a highly trained liar — even rarer than a falseman) attend in their stead.

R

ossamünd did not much like the Master-of-Clerks, but right then the officious fellow
was an astoundingly welcome sight.
"Blight your eyes, boy!" the clerk-master almost shrieked, pale and breathing hard from the
fright. "You were nigh on the end of me! Where have you come from? How did you get here?
Where did you get that running gash upon your crown?"
"A rever-man below us, sir! A rever-man in the tunnels underneath!"
"A ‘rever-man’? What do you mean?" the clerk-master snapped, recovering his composure
and sitting again on his seat at the long table that dominated the room. The man was without his
gorgeous wig, looking slightly ridiculous, his head bound with cloth and showing tufts of cropped
wiry hair.
Rossamünd could not believe the man did not know what a rever-man was. "A revenant, sir!
A gudgeon!"
"Nonsense, child! Utter fiddle-faddle!" The Master-of-Clerks flicked his hand in angry
dismissal.
Laudibus Pile appeared as if from nowhere. "What is the trouble, sir?" he purred with his oily
voice, his disturbing eyes narrow and calculating as he saw Rossamünd standing where he should
never have been.
Looking about in a daze, Rossamünd began to realize he was actually in the Master-of-Clerks'
private file. He had been here just once before. "Mister Pile!" he effused, unaware that he had
just cut across his superior. "I fought a rever-man down in the tunnels of old Winstreslewe!"
"The boy has a wound to the head. He is delirious! He forgets himself! Send for Surgeon
Swill," Podious Whympre seemed to demand of the air itself.
Rossamünd felt at his head. His hat was gone, lost somewhere in the horrid under-dark. His
hand came away bloody. "I am not delirious." He frowned at the red. "I fought a gudgeon!" He
could not understand the resistance, the lack of action.
"I do not know what you are jabbering about, child, but I would recommend you lower your
volume and mend your manner," the Master-of-Clerks ordered with a dangerous look. "You are
in thick enough without adding insubordination to your troubles!"
Feeling equal parts perplexity and fright, Rossamünd obeyed.
All the while Pile had been shrewdly examining the young prentice. He now bent to murmur
into the Master-of-Clerks' ear.
Exposed, the prentice held the leer's gaze regardless. He had no lies to hide.
"I see," said Whympre at the leer's secret words. "Well, young prentice, show us this — this
rever-man." He spoke the word as if it were a vulgar thing. "Take us to where you think you
found such an unlikely creature."
Rossamünd turned to go back down. He did not want to return to the benighted maze beneath
but was eager to prove what he had been through. It was then he realized he did not know how to

return to the scene of violence, so keen had he been on getting out. Some of his lefts had become
rights in the end, and there was no telling precisely which and when. He hesitated.
Surgeon Swill arrived in the enormous room and all notions of going below were
subordinated as, with an intently professional expression, he examined Rossamünd's hurts. "This
is a nasty blow," he declared after a silent observation of the young prentice's head. "The boy
must surely be in a daze. How did you get the wound? Knock your cranium on a doorpost or the
like, yes?"
"No, sir, the basket did this to me!" he said, watching nervously as the surgeon reached into a
sinister-looking case.
"He persists with this daft notion of a monster in the cellars," the Master-of-Clerks said with
strange, affected sympathy. "Poor, foolish child."
"Indeed. Clearly dazed," Swill insisted, producing a bandage. "Such an injury can make one
believe he sees all kinds of phantasms. Bed rest and a callic draught are the best for you, young
lantern-stick. Let this be a lesson to you not to be dashing about after douse-lanterns!"
Callic draughts were for drowsing the mentally infirm — Rossamünd knew his potives too
well. He did not want an addled, forgetful sleep. He wanted to tell the horrible news that the
unthinkable had happened: that a monster had been found inside Winstermill. As he submitted to
the bandage being wrapped about his crown, Rossamünd was keenly aware of the unsympathetic
gazes upon him. "I have to tell the Lamplighter-Marshal!" he insisted.
"And so you shall," said Whympre, "and illuminate him and me both as to your illegal
surveyings and nocturnal invasions. I warn you though, child, your chatter about buried bogles
will not wash with him either. The only event for which we have proof unavoidable is your
trespass in my rooms."
"Mister Sebastipole will confirm I tell the truth, sir," Rossamünd said obstinately with an
angry glance at Pile.
The falseman gave Rossamünd a cool, almost venomous look.
The Master-of-Clerks and the falseman and the surgeon exchanged the merest hint of a
pointed glance.
Whympre declared firmly, "Well then, it's off to the Marshal we go, prentice. He will not be
pleased, for he is always busy with his papers. Batterstyx!" he called to the air. "Batterstyx! My
perruque!" An aged private man appeared from some other door bearing the clerk-master's
lustrous black wig. Once it was fitted to the great man's satisfaction, the Master-of-Clerks strode
forth. "Come along!"
Rossamünd was marched through the perpendicular geometry of the manse. Accompanied by
the three men, he was taken from the far back corner to somewhere near the front, where the
Lamplighter-Marshal's duty room was found. Pile knocked for them and they waited.
Presently this port sprang open and Inkwill emerged, looking overworked. "Master-ofClerks," the registry clerk said, managing a wry smile. "What troublesome punctilio troubles you
now, sir?"
Whympre sniffed as if to indicate Inkwill was beneath his notice. "We have a disturbing
breach of security to relay to the Marshal. Go tell this to him."
Why not just tell him of the rever-man? Rossamünd thought angrily. He knew there were
forms to follow, but in a circumstance such as this, surely they could be put aside?
"Aye, sir." The registry clerk nodded, his eyes going a little wide at the bandage about
Rossamünd's head.
The door closed, there was a wait; it opened again and Inkwill reappeared to gesture the four
through. The anteclave was empty of its usual crowd of the Marshal's secretaries and assisting
clerks, yet many piles of paper remained. Even to Rossamünd — for whom these countless
documents had no relevance — such a mass of paper gave the room a feeling of nagging,
insurmountable and never-ending labor. Inkwill guided him though the thin lane between desks.
"Stay here, prentice," the Master-of-Clerks ordered.

Rossamünd obeyed, his head starting to throb uncomfortably, while Whympre, Swill and Pile
went on into the Lamplighter-Marshal's duty room. Very quickly Inkwill was back, dashing
through the anteclave without a word.
More waiting, and the throb in Rossamünd's pate grew into an ache.
Inkwill returned now with Sebastipole in tow, the leer giving Rossamünd one look and
saying, "That is a fine bump you have got yourself, my boy. Follow me, if you will," before
going directly in to the Marshal.
In the shadow of Sebastipole, the young prentice inched his way into the very soul of
Winstermill's existence, hands habitually gripped before him at a now absent thrice-high. To
Rossamünd's left, the Master-of-Clerks had stationed himself on a richly cushioned tandem chair.
Swill was on his right, poised stiffly on the edge of a hall chair, alert, waiting. On the clerkmaster's left stood Laudibus Pile, leaning against a false architrave, head down. But right before
him, behind a desk piled with documents, sat the Lamplighter-Marshal, the eighth Earl of the
Baton Imperial of Fayelillian. He appeared drawn, and sharply aware of the entire substance of
his manifold burdens, and was staring keenly at Rossamünd. "Good evening, Prentice-Lighter
Bookchild," he said, his warm voice crackling slightly with weariness. The Marshal's quick gaze,
penetrating and wily, seemed to sum up Rossamünd, standing as stiff as an Old Gate Pensioner, in
one acute look. He cleared his throat and gestured to the hall chair. "Please, take your ease."
Despite dark sags of sleeplessness, the man's amiable, fatherly appearance remained. Indeed,
with his sweeping white mustachios, a noble lift to his chin and a white-blond forelock curling
almost boyishly upon his brow, the effect this close was magnified.
Sebastipole stood at the corner of the massive table while Inkwill showed Rossamünd to his
seat, positioned squarely before the great man.
"I am told by the clerk-master," the Marshal continued, "that ye believe yerself to have fought
with a homunculid in the ancient tunnels below us. Is this so, prentice?"
"Aye, sir." Rossamünd swallowed hard. He was about to let the whole tale burble out, when,
with a cold stab in his innards, he realized he might betray Numps by telling of the undercroft.
With a flicker of a look to the two leers, Rossamünd faltered and went silent.
With this, Laudibus Pile raised his face and, with a dark glance at Sebastipole, fixed
Rossamünd with his own see-all stare. It was profoundly daunting to have a twin of falsemen's
eyes — red orb, blue iris — staring cannily from left and right. Rossamünd shifted on the hard
seat in his discomfort.
"Are ye well, son? I hope that wound does not overly trouble ye," the Lamplighter-Marshal
said, nodding to the thick bandage about the prentice's head.
"A little, sir."
"I did my best to mend him, Lamplighter-Marshal," Swill put in. "It is a nasty cut underneath
all that cloth and I am sure, however it was sustained, it is enough to knock the sense out of the
boy."
"So ye said before, surgeon," the Marshal said gravely. "Tell me, Rossamünd, do ye feel
knocked about in yer intellectuals?"
"Somewhat, sir, but I was fully aware before and I am fully aware now."
The Marshal smiled genially. "Good man." He shuffled some papers before him. "The good
clerk-master has told me his take on yer tale, prentice, and is skeptical. I would like to hear yer
own recollection and we shall go on from that. Proceed, young fellow."
Rossamünd cleared his throat, took a rattling, timorous breath, cleared his throat a second
time and finally began. "I had missed douse-lanterns, sir, and found a way under the manse and it
took me through all kinds of furtigrades and passages..." And so he told of the terrific events,
passing very quickly over the how of his presence, avoiding any mention of the bloom baths or
Numps, concentrating most on the battle with the prefabricated horror. All present listened in
unmoved silence until his short recounting was finished. Upon its completion the LamplighterMarshall nodded gravely and smoothed his mustachios with forefinger and thumb. "I am not a

commander who likes to set one fellow's telling against another's, yet ye seem a rather slight lad
to be the conqueror of so fearsome a thing as a rever-man. More than this is how such a beastie
ever won into places no monster has ever made it to before. How-be-it, my boy, ye were the only
one present and my telltale finds no fault with yer summation."
Rossamünd had not been aware of any communication between the Marshal and the
lamplighter's agent, yet somehow Sebastipole had made what he observed clear to the
Lamplighter-Marshal. The leer gave a barely perceptible nod to the prentice. "Indeed, sir, what
he has told us has contained no lie."
He believes me after all! Rossamünd could have done a little caper for joy, but kept still and
somber.
Laudibus Pile darted a calculating, ill-willed squint at Sebastipole.
"As it is, this is a most difficult situation, prentice." The Lamplighter-Marshall became very
stern. "Ye have placed me in a bind, for on the one hand ye must be applauded — surely awarded
— for yer courage and sheer pluck at prevailing in such a mismatched contest as ever a fellow
was set to."
Rossamünd's heart leaped with hope.
"Yet," the Lamplighter-Marshal went on firmly, "the circumstances surrounding yer feat of
arms are drastically irregular, would ye not agree, lad? To be out beyond douse-lanterns though
not of the lantern-watch or the night-watch is a grave breach. Entering restricted parts of the
manse, another grave breach. Perhaps we should simply all be glad for the blighted thing's
destruction. But a rule for all is a rule for one, and a rule for one is a rule for all, do ye agree,
Prentice Bookchild?"
The prentice swallowed hard. "Aye, sir." Though he had never heard entering the
underregions of Winstermill formally proscribed, this revelation did not surprise him — most
things were out-of-bounds for a prentice.
The Master-of-Clerks stirred. "If I may interject here, most honored Marshal, with the
observation that my own telltale does not find all particulars of the prentice's retelling wholly
satisfying."
With a single, stiff nod, Laudibus Pile confirmed his master's claim.
"When falsemen disagree, eh?" The Lamplighter-Marshal became even sterner, hard, almost
angry — with whom, Rossamünd could not tell, and he swallowed again at the anxiousness
parching his throat.
"In fact, sir," the Master-of-Clerks pressed, "I might go so far as to state that one does not
need to be a falseman to detect the irregularities in this... this one's story. Perhaps your telltale
does not see it so clearly? I am rather in the line that this little one is just grasping for glories to
cover his defaulting." He bent his attention on Rossamünd. "You have waxed eloquent upon
your fight with the wretched creature, child, and the proof that you came to blows with something
is clear; but I still do not follow how it is that you came to be in the passeyards at all or why it is
that your journey took you to my very sanctum? You avoided the question before, but you shall
not do so now."
"The passeyards, sir?" Rossamünd asked.
"Yes." The Master-of-Clerks flurried his fingers impatiently. The interleaves, the cuniculus,
the slypes — the passages twixt walls and beneath halls, boy!"
"Oh."
The Lamplighter-Marshal raised his right hand, a signal for silence, stopping the Master-ofClerks cold. "Yer point is made, clerk-master. Prentice Bookchild, ye have a reputation for
lateness, do ye not? As I understand it, ye have gained the moniker 'Master Come-lately,' aye?"
"Aye, sir."
"So tell us true: how is it ye found such well-hidden tunnels as those ye occupied tonight?"
Ashamed, Rossamünd dropped his head then darted a look to the Marshal, whose mild
attentive expression shoed no hint of his thoughts or opinion. "I was with the glimner, Mister

Numps, down in the Low Gutter, and I forgot the time so — so I went by the drains so I could get
into the manse after douse-lanterns." He was determined not to implicate Mister Numps in any
manner, but with a falseman at both sides, it was an impossible ploy. Yet Rossamünd was
desperate enough to attempt to dissemble. "I found them... through... through somewhere under
the... the Low Gutter, sir—"
Laudibus Pile's glittering gaze narrowed. "Liar!" the falseman hissed caustically.
"Ye will address an Emperor's servant with respect, sir," the marshal-lighter pronounced
sharply, "be he above or below ye in station!"
"He does not lie, Pile!" Sebastipole added grimly.
"He dissembles!" Laudibus snapped, with a black look to the Marshal then his counterpart.
"Indeed he might," Sebastipole countered smoothly, "but he does not lie."
"Enough, gentlemen!" The Marshal cut through, and there was silence. He returned his
attention to Rossamünd. "Now, my man, whitewashing tends only to make one look guilty. Say
it straight: we only want to find how this gudgeon-basket got into our so-long inviolate home,
and so stop it happening again. Where did ye gain entry into the under parts?"
"Through the old bloom baths." Rossamünd dropped his head, feeling the most wretched
blackguard that ever weaseled another. "Under the Skillions, where they once tended the bloom."
He did not mind trouble for himself near half as much as implicating Numps.
The Marshal just nodded.
"What old bloom baths?" asked the Master-of-Clerks sharply, forgetting his place perhaps,
interrupting the Marshal's inquiries. "How, by the blight, did you find such a place on your own?
A place, I might add," he continued with the barest hint of a displeased look to the Marshal, "that
I have only heard of tonight! You cannot expect us to believe you discovered such a place in
solus!"
"In solus, sir?"
"By yourself," he returned tartly. "Who showed you where they are?"
"I—" Rossamünd did not know how to answer.
"Speak it all!" Laudibus Pile spat.
"Silence!" barked the Lamplighter-Marshal. "Another gust from ye, sir, and ye will be
exiting these rooms!"
An undaunted, cunning light flickered in the depths of Pile's eyes, yet he yielded and seemed
to retreat deeply within himself.
After an uncomfortable, ringing pause, the Master-of-Clerks fixed the prentice with his nearhungry stare. "You must tell us, prentice," he said softly, "how then do you know of such a
place?"
"It is common enough knowledge that there are ancient, seldom visited waterworks and
cavities underneath our own pile, sir," came Sebastipole's unexpected interjection.
"I think, Master-of-Clerks," was the Lamplighter-Marshal's firma and timely addition, "that
ye may leave this line of questioning now. The boy has been brought up short enough with the
night's ordeal ipse adversus — standing alone! What is more, it brings no clarity to the more
troubling details."
The Master-of-Clerks became a picture of pious obedience. "Certainly, sir," he returned
respectfully, smoothing the gorgeous hems of his frock coat. "I am just troubled that the
existence of those old bloom baths is what has allowed the creature — if it exists — to find its
way in. If that be so, then we will most certainly have to do away with the whole place," the
Master-of-Clerks declared officiously, "to be thorough."
From across the Marshal's desk Rossamünd could see the tension in Sebastipole, the
lamplighter's agent's jaw tightening, loosening, tightening, loosening with rhythmic distraction.
"But the rever-man was shut up in some old room a long way from the bloom baths," the
young prentice dared.
"So you say, child." The Master-of-Clerks smiled serenely at Rossamünd, a sweet face to

cover sharp words. "Yet if a mere prentice can find his way so deep in forgotten places, then why
not some mindless monster, and these unvetted baths may well be the cause."
The Lamplighter-Marshal raised his hand, stopping Podious Whympre short. "There is no
need and nothing gained from despoiling those old baths," he said firmly. "They have been here
for longer than we, and are buried deeply enough, and no harm will come from the quiet pottering
of faithful, incapacitated lighters."
"You already know of it, sir?" the Master-of-Clerks replied with a studied expression. "This
— this continued unregistered, unrecorded activity? Why was I not informed... sir?"
"I do know of it, Clerk-Master Whympre," the Marshal replied, "and I iterate again it is not
the case of most concern. I could well ask ye how it is that there is a way down from yer own
chambers into these buried levels."
The Master-of-Clerks blanched. "It is a private store, sir. I had no idea it connected to
regions more clandestine," he explained quickly.
Other questions continued. Rossamünd felt unable to answer any of them to full satisfaction:
did he have any inkling of where the gudgeon had come from?
No, sir, he did not. It had, by all evidence, been locked in the room rather than having arrived
from somewhere. In the end he simply had to conclude that he truly had no idea of the how or the
why or the where of the gudgeon's advent.
Did he recognize where he found the gudgeon?
No, sir, he did not.
Would he be able to find that place again — or give instructions to another to do the same?
Rossamünd hesitated; he could only do his best, sir. He described his left-hand logic to
solving the maze and as much of the actual lay of the passages and the rest as he could recall.
And all the while the Master-of-Clerks was looking at him with his peculiar, predatory gaze.
Pile seemed to sulk, and said nothing.
"I will look into this, sir," Sebastipole declared. "Josclin is still not well enough; Clement and
I shall take Drawk and some other trusty men and seek out this buried room." With that the
lamplighter's agent left.
"If you could excuse me, Lamplighter-Marshal." Swill stood and bowed. "I must attend to
pressing duties," he said with a quick look to Sebastipole's back.
"Certainly, surgeon," the Marshal replied. "Ye are free to go — and ye may depart too, clerkmaster. Yer prompt action is commendable."
"And what of this young trespasser?" The Master-of-Clerks peered down his nose at
Rossamünd. "I hope you will be taking him in hand. Whatever other deeds might or might not
surround him, you cannot deny that he has contravened two most inviolate rules, and it is grossly
unsatisfactory that he has violated my own offices."
"What I do with Prentice Bookchild is between him and me," the Marshal returned firmly.
"Good night, Podious!"
With a polite and contrite bow the Master-of-Clerks left, his telltale and the surgeon
following.
Grindrod was admitted in their stead, hastily dressed and looking slightly frowzy.
"Ah, Lamplighter-Sergeant!" the Marshal cried. "Ye seem to have been missing one of yer
charges, but here I am returning him to ye."
"Aye, sir," Grindrod stood straight and, appearing a little embarrassed, gave Rossamünd a
quick yet thunderous glare. "Thank ye, sir."
"Not at all," the Marshal answered. "Ye make fine lampsmen, Sergeant-lighter. This young
prentice has been doing the duites of a lamplighter even as his fellows sleep. Return him to his
cot and set a strong guard over his cell row. Fell doing have been afoot. We shall discuss his
deeds after."
The lamplighter-sergeant looked stunned. "Aye, sir." Thunder turned to puzzled satisfaction.
"Our thanks to ye, Prentice Bookchild," the Lamplighter-Marshal said to Rossamünd. "Yer

part her is done; ye played the man frank and true. Ye may turn in to yer cot at last. Be sure to
report to Doctor Crispus tomorrow morning. Good night, prentice."
With that the interview was ended.
Rossamünd left under the charge of Grindrod, feeling a traitor. While he was sent to sleep, he
was aware of a growing bustle about as the soldiery of the manse were woken up to defend it
from any other rever-men that might emerge from below.
"I don't know whether to castigate or commend ye, young Lately!" the lamplighter-sergeant
grumped as he led the prentice along the passages. "Just get yer blundering bones to yer cot and
I'll figure a fitting end for yer tomorrow."
For another night Rossamünd readied himself in the cold drak and slept with his bed chest
pulled across the door to his cell.

17
Hasty Departures
sis edisserum Tutin term, loosely meaning “please explain”, this is an order from a superior (usually the Emperor)
to appear before him and a panel of peers forthwith to offer reasons, excuses, evidence, testimony and whatever else
might be required to elucidate upon whatever demands clarity. A sis edisserum is usually seen as a portent of
Imperial ire, a sign that the person or people so summoned are in it deep and must work hard to restore Clementine's
confidence. A sis edisserum is a “black mark” against your name, and very troublesome to remove.

R

ossamünd awoke with the worst ache of head and body that he had ever known and his
bladder fit to burst. He hurt like the aftermath of the most severe concussion he had ever received
in harundo practice. For a time he could not remember much of yesterday, though a lurking
apprehension warned him the memory would be unwelcome. With the sight of his salumanticum
discarded on the floor and the bed chest blocking the door recollection struck. A gudgeon... a
gudgeon in the marrow of the headquarters of the lamplighters! A monster loose in Winstermill!
He dragged back the chest and opened the door to find Threnody there, leaning on the wall as
if she had been waiting.
"You missed the most extraordinary pudding at mains last night, she said dryly. Evidently
she had elected to speak to him again.
"Aye..." Rossamünd knew by “extraordinary” she did not mean “good.” Threnody had
always hated the food served to the prentices, and the new culinaire was achieving new acmes of
inedibility.
"You might be a poor conversationalist," she continued as they went to morning forming,
completely heedless of the thick bandage about his head, "but at least you're interesting. Between
Arabis having the others ignore me, and Plod mooning and staring all through the awful meal, it
was a very long evening." She peered at him. "Where's your hat?" But by then Grindrod was
shouting attention and all talk ceased.
In files out on the Cypress Walk it was obvious the manse was in a state of agitation, with the
house-watch marching regular patrols about the Mead and the feuterers letting the dogs out on
leads to sniff at every crevice and cranny. Under a louring sky the atmosphere of the fortress was
tense and watchful.
"Do not be distracted by all this hustle ye see today, lads," Grindrod advised tersely. "There
was an unwelcome guest in our cellars last night, but the rotted clenchpoop is done in now." He
looked meaningfully at Rossamünd. "Just attend to yer duties with yer regular vigor."
At breakfast the other prentices stared openly at Rossamünd's bandaged head.
"How's it, Lately?" asked Smellgrove as Rossamünd sat down with his fellows of Q Hesiod
Gæta. "Is the bee's buzz true?"
"What buzz?"
"That you came to hand strokes with a gudgeon last night," said Wheede, pointing to
Rossamünd's bound noggin.
"Ah, aye, it nearly ruined itself trying to destroy me."
"Pullets and cockerels!" said several boys on either side.
Insisting others shift to make room, Threnody sat next to him. "Have any of you others
fought one before?" she asked knowingly.
Universal shakes of the head.
"Because I can tell you," she boasted, "that a full-formed lamplighter would struggle to win
against one, let alone a half-done lamp boy."
"I have heard it that wits can't do much to them either." This was Arabis, listening at the far

end of the bench.
Threnody lifted her chin and pretended she had not heard him.
"Tell us, Rosey," asked Pillow, "how did you do the thing in?"
"I burned the basket's head out with loomblaze!" Rossamünd said, with more passion than he
intended. "It went smashing down through the stair into the pits deep underneath."
There was an approving mutter of amazement. The looks of awe turned Rossamünd's way
were simultaneously intoxicating and hard to bear. He ducked his head to hide his confused
delight, but one incredulous snort from Threnody and his small, uncommon joy was obliterated in
an instant.
After breakfast Grindrod did to say any more about Rossamünd's yesternight excursions.
However, he did seem to address Rossamünd with a touch more dignity as he sent him to Doctor
Crispus for further examination. "Ye may take yer time, Prentice Bookchild: well-earned
wounds need proper treating."
*

*

*

*

*

Cuts and sutures, my boy, you certainly have a bump and a gash upon your scalp to show for
some kind of scuffle," the physician declared as he cleaned the nasty contusion on Rossamünd's
hairline and rebandaged it.
"Swill tried to recommend callic for me last night," Rossamünd said pointedly.
Crispus wagged his head in disapproval. "Fumbling butchering novice," he said, clucking his
tongue. "Even a first-year tyro would know callic is to for concussions. By your current alertness
I can assume he did not succeed in his fuddle-brained prescription?"
"No he did not, Doctor. I know enough of the chemistry to have not taken any even if he
had."
"My apologies, Rossamünd. He certainly is not who I would have here," Crispus complained.
"But the young quackeen is only nominally under my authority; rather he answers to the Masterof-Clerks himself. Very unsatisfactory, and a clear nuisance when he comes a-quacking in my
trim infirmary." He clucked his tongue again. "A mere articled man strutting about as if he is a
senior surgeon."
"He certainly reads some strange books for a surgeon," said Rossamünd.
"Does he, indeed?" Crispus blinked owlishly.
"Aye, sir." Rossamünd squinted at the ceiling in recollection. "Dark books, from what my
old Master Craumpalin told me."
"Where did you see these, child?" the physician pressed.
"In Swill's apartment, way up in the manse's attics. Mother Snooks sent me up the kitchen
furtigrade, delivering a pig's head to him."
"The kitchen furtigrade?" Crispus looked utterly amazed. "I did not know one existed,
though Winstermill is old enough to have a thousand such obscure places. You certainly have
had a tour of the slypes, haven't you?"
"And the attic apartment?"
"Oh, that place is just his personal library, a place of private reflection. ‘Do not disturb’ and
all that. I've never begrudged him this: a professional man must have his sanctuary for study — I
have one of my own. In our profession there are some strange tomes — some better had we never
read them, of course. And as for the pig's head — well, a surgeon must practice his sutures, I
suppose."
Rossamünd was unconvinced.
Sebastipole entered the infirmary and, after asking of Rossamünd's health, went on to request
a personal word. The dressing of the wound complete, Crispus left them and attended to other
patients.

"Did you find anything in the tunnels, Mister Sebastipole?" Rossamünd asked eagerly but in a
low voice.
"There was no gudgeon corpse," the leer answered.
Rossamünd soul sank.
"And all that was left of the stair was splinters and wood-dust," Sebastipole went on.
Rossamünd's dismay deepened. His desperate struggle must have wrenched the ancient
furtigrade too much.
"I have heard of gudgeons so cunningly made they dissolve into a puddle after they expire,"
Sebastipole expounded further. "Do not worry, Rossamünd, you are believed," he added, seeing
the young prentice's dismay. "But I must tell you it was touch and go to even find your path; we
found our way more by your instructions than your trail. Were you using a nullodour last night at
all?"
Rossamünd felt a caustic flush of guilt, as if he had been caught out. "You can smell a
nullodour?" He had no reason to feel this, yet he did.
"Actually, no: they do their job just as they should — all smells gone where applied. It is
rather that absence of scent that is the telltale signifier. Think of it like reading a letter where a
clumsy author has cut out his errors with a blade and as you read there are great holes in the
sentences. You know something was there but you'd be hard-pressed to say what it was."
Sebastipole sniffed, then blew his nose. "Such a ruse will work against a brute beast but not
against the pragmatical senses of a well-learned leer." He looked at Rossamünd searchingly.
"Oh," the young prentice said in a small voice, "and there were no smells down there?"
"Exactly so." The leer's expression was impenetrable. "The whole area was a great blank,
with only the merest suggestion of many obliterated smells. If you pressed me I might say that
more than one nullodour was employed, but it is too hard to prove so now."
"Oh... I am sorry, Mister Sebastipole," Rossamünd murmured. "My... my old masters have
me wearing a little each day... to keep me safe, they said, from sniffing noses." He could not see
the sense in hiding it now.
"Indeed?" The leer looked astutely at him, held him with a silent, penetrating regard. "I
detected a nullodour on you the night we went out lighting together."
Rossamünd ducked his head and blushed. "My old masters are very protective of me."
"And you are very obedient to them, it would appear."
Rossamünd nodded sheepishly.
Sebastipole smiled. "Yet, Rossamünd, I did manage to detect the merest smell of your foe. It
was exactly like the foreign, foul slot of Numption's attackers."
"What does that mean, sir?"
"I have not encountered enough gudgeons to know beyond doubt, but the similarity seems
suspicious to me. It may well mean the creature that beset Numption and that which you slew last
night — though separated by three years or more — have come from the same benighted test,
made by the same black habilist. If that is so, the wretch has grown arrogant enough to try his
constructions on us again!" The anger in Sebastipole's eyes was made more terrible by their
unnatural hue. "More galling still, we did not find how the homunculid found its way in. Others
could come."
Rossamünd's imagination fired with the abhorrent scene of the fortress overrun with revermen.
"Hmm." The leer became ruminative. "I can say that it certainly did not come from the
region of Numption's bloom baths."
"I did not want to tell about them," Rossamünd confessed forlornly.
"I know you did not, Rossamünd." The leer spoke up quickly. "You are an honest fellow and
your honesty last night made proceedings easier. Fret not for dear Mister Numps: he is
protected, and his 'friends' with him. I asked him to let us in and only took those with me who
would treat him kindly."

Rossamünd felt a little relief at this.
Sebastipole put an encouraging hand on the young prentice's shoulder. "No more nighttime
wanderings for you, my boy. Play the man, Rossamünd, be not afraid but be on your guard and
carry your salumanticum with you always: strange and suspicious things turn in the manse now."
With this warning the leer left him, and Rossamünd went out of the infirmary and rejoined the
slightly awed prentices stepping regular out on Evolution Green.
*

*

*

*

*

At middens Rossamünd rushed down to the lantern store, the guilty conviction that he had
failed Numps a heavy weight right in the pit of his gizzards. Yet what else could he have done?
Oh! If only I hadn't slept past douse-lanterns!
His compunction was not eased either when Numps looked at him only very briefly with big,
timid eyes and said nothing for a long time. "I heard it that you were set upon by a pale, runny
man yesternight, Mister Rossamünd," the glimner eventually muttered softly, not looking up from
his working. "Just like old Numps was."
"Aye, Mister Numps, I was," Rossamünd answered.
"Oh dear, oh dear — I'm sorry, Mister Rossamünd, I'm sorry! You wanted my help and I
showed you into trouble — poor, limpling-headed Numps!"
This made Rossamünd feel more miserable than ever. "I — I could have turned back, I
suppose. Besides, I beat the rever-man and got out."
Numps stopped polishing the lamp-pane gripped by the nimble toes of his left foot.
"It is me who must say his sorries, Mister Numps, for telling them about the bloom baths,"
Rossamünd blurted out. "I did not want to say... but I had to be honest — I... I..." Rossamünd's
words felt very thin and meaningless.
For a while Numps sat, staring at his lap. Finally he looked up. "Fair is fair. One ‘sorry’
each. You had to fight the runny man because of Numps' limpling head and then some people
want to talk and talk about it and ask things, the same things over and over till you're all done
with it. I remember it, just the same on the day of all my red."
"Aye, I suppose." Rossamünd was not soothed by all this sorrying.
The hollow sensation of friendship part-fractured persisted, and the two cleaned panes in
reflective silence.
"Mister Sebastipole reckons my gudgeon and the one you fought might come from the same
maker," Rossamünd finally tried. "He said they could not find where my rever-man got in,
though. Do you have any notion, Mister Numps?"
Numps shook his head. "No one can get from out there into here." He smiled. "Even I know
that. Only the sparrows of the Sparrowling make it here... oh, and you. But I reckon they let you
in ‘cause you look right, but it is still clever to cover the smell." He tapped his handsome nose
and his smile grew cryptic.
With the chime from a bell, Rossamünd realized with an assault of fright in his chest that
middens was ended. Having learned his lesson for lateness only too well, he scrambled his
tangibles together, and with a quick bow and a short "good afternoon," took hasty leave of the
startled glimner.
*

*

*

*

*

Though the discovery of a gudgeon within was disconcerting news, Rossamünd's victory over
it was powerfully encouraging, and the lighters particularly held him a mite-sized example of true
lampsman valor. Among the greater share of the clerks, however, the rumor prevailed that he
had made the whole tale up to cover his disobedience. From what Rossamünd had heard, the
Master-of-Clerks was furious that no disciplinary action was to be taken for either Rossamünd's

lateness or his unauthorized presence in Whympre's chambers.
"I think that bump on yer brain-box serves ye a better reminder to do yer duty than any
reprimand I can give ye," the Lamplighter-Marshal had declared during a brief interview the next
morning.
Coursing for rever-men beneath the manse continued, Sebastipole finding alternative routes
into the foundations other than Numps' undercroft. The progress was slow and incomplete, the
searchers hampered by the strange terrain and, as rumor would have it, by the Master-of-Clerks'
insistence that underneath was the sole property of the Emperor and not somewhere for lighters to
be roaming about carelessly or without permissions or reports in triplicate.
Meanwhile the prentices went on with their routines, and the awe of the other lads toward
Rossamünd waned. Out on Evolution Green each day, Rossamünd noticed Laudibus Pile
sometimes lurking, watching them at their marching and training where he had never lurked nor
watched before. It was not constant, but enough to be annoying.
"See, it's him again," he pointed out to Threnody as the prentices were between drills.
"Perhaps he finds our movements appealing," she offered lightly. "Though what interminable
stepping-regular and fodicar movements have to do with lighting lamps I do not know. I'm glad
there is only a month left of it."
Scowling at the leer, Rossamünd was glad too that the last month of prenticing was
approaching. He would be able to serve on the road at last and do his part.
*

*

*

*

*

On the last day of Pulvis, with only one month and four pageants-of-arms left till Billeting
Day, Rossamünd was with Numps again at middens. Door 143 gave a rattling bang, and
Sebastipole quickly appeared from the avenue of shelves and parts. He was disturbingly,
uncharacteristically agitated, the blue of his eyes too pale, their red like new-spilled blood.
Rossamünd stood, frowning with dismay. "Mister Sebastipole?"
"Young Master Rossamünd. Good, I am spared the time to find you too." The leer's brow
glistened with perspiration.
Rossamünd had never seen Sebastipole so agitated — not even when he was facing the
Trought. "Are... are you distressed, sir?"
Hello, Mister ‘Pole." Numps was clearly delighted to see the leer. "Come to see my friends
again?"
"Not today, Numption," the leer answered, returning the glimner's smile with one of his own,
brotherly and arm despite his mysterious urgency. "I am glad you have Rossamünd for a friend
now too, for today I will be leaving."
The prentice's innards gave a lurch. Sebastipole leaving? Rossamünd did not care for such a
notion: the manse felt safer with the leer somewhere at hand.
Attention now fixed on a particularly grimy lantern-window, Numps nodded. "All right,
Mister ‘Pole, Numps will see you again soon, then."
"You're going, Mister Sebastipole?" Rossamünd asked.
"Indeed," the leer returned, "I will most probably be gone for a goodly while."
The glimner finally looked up from his rubbing. "More days than Numps has fingers or
toes?"
"Yes, Numption, more even than that." Sebastipole gave him a sad, affectionate look. "I do
not know for how long I will be absent."
Numps' joy collapsed. "But why?"
The leer crouched down and looked up at the glimner.
"The short of it is, my old friend, the Lamplighter-Marshal has been served a sis edisserum.
Do you know what that is?"
Though Sebastipole was talking to Numps, Rossamünd nodded. This Imperial summons had

played infrequent but significant parts in the more exciting stories in his old pamphlets.
Numps just blinked slowly, his look of distress mixing with increasing confusion.
"It means that the Marshal must appear before the Emperor's representatives posthaste,"
Sebastipole explained, "and as his falseman — his telltale — I am to go with him."
"But why does the Marshal have to go?" Numps persisted.
The leer hesitated. "Because... because the Emperor's ministers have ordered him to meet
with them all the way down in the Considine."
The Considine? Rossamünd was amazed: he had hoped to see the subcapital as a vinegaroon
visiting as part of a ram's crew, to tread slowly into harbor and admire its grand buildings and
massive walls. "Why have they done that?" he piped, with questions of his own. "What has the
Lamplighter-Marshal done?"
Sebastipole looked at him squarely. "He has done nothing," the leer said with contained
anger. "But somehow they have already heard of the gudgeon in our bowels and he is required to
explain both this and what they consider our failure to check the great many theroscades and
depredations along the highroad."
"It's not the Lamplighter-Marshal's fault that bogles and nickers attack!" Rossamünd could
not believe the folly of such a notion. "Nor that the rever-man was found in here! How can he
explain something he couldn't know? It was those butchers who brought the poor Trought down
on us, not the Marshal!"
"I suspect there is more behind this sis edisserum than a simple ‘please explain.’ Someone
plots the Marshal's embarrassment, perhaps, or his removal."
"Who would want such a terrible thing?" Rossamünd asked indignantly.
"Maybe those who covet his popularity with the lamplighters and the people of the Idlewild,
and his position as a peer," answered the leer. "Those who will happily destroy any good just so
they can have it their way, without any thought to wisdom or right."
How could anyone be black-hearted enough to wish ill on such a great man? Rossamünd
reflected bitterly.
"But why do you have to go?" Numps interjected, frowning with intense, puzzled
concentration.
"I go because the Marshal needs me." Sebastipole became kinder. "I must see through all the
lies and traps of cunning meant for him. While I am gone you must be careful, do you follow me,
Numption?" The leer bent his neck sideways to look Numps in the eye. "If you are scared, hide
with your hidden friends. Yes?"
The glimner nodded, his head dropping dejectedly. "Yes Mister ‘Pole, if I'm scared I will
hide, yes."
Standing, Sebastipole turned to Rossamünd. "Watch out for my friend, Rossamünd. Only
you and Crispus show him any abiding kindness, and the doctor is a man daily beleaguered with
too many tasks." Sebastipole gripped Rossamünd firmly by his shoulder, startling him. "Will
you do this?" the leer asked, uncommon anxiety clear in his queer-colored gaze.
"Aye, Mister Sebastipole," Rossamünd said seriously. "Aye, I most certainly will."
"Bravo! Good man! Now I must go. We have been given little time to satisfy the
summons."
"You come back again, Mister ‘Pole," Numps insisted.
"You know I have to go away at times. But I always return, do I not?" He fixed Numps with
a firm look. "Do I not?"
Sniffing, Numps eventually, grudgingly, nodded.
"And I will write to you as I have before," the leer pressed, "and Doctor Crispus will still be
here... and so will Rossamünd."
At that Numps looked at the prentice and gave a pathetic smile.
Nodding, Rossamünd grinned awkwardly in return.
Sebastipole sat with Numps for a little longer, then said, "And now, friend Numption, I must

must go and you must trust me and Rossamünd as your friend." Sebastipole stood.
"Yes, Mister ‘Pole," Numps relented. "You are my for-always friend, and Rossamünd is my
new old friend. I will see you back here soon again, yes?"
"Yes, you shall — as soon as is possible. May well betide both of you," he said with feeling.
"We shall meet again — I will make certain of it! Until then I will write if able, though there will
be much work to do, great labors perhaps, but I will still attempt a letter. Good-bye!" With that,
he turned quickly with a flick of his coachman's cloak and exited the lantern store.
Numps began to sing and mutter.
Rossamünd could feel — almost see — the glimner withdraw into himself, no longer heeding
the prentice sitting by him. Rossamünd quietly returned to the manse and left the glimner to his
introspections.

18
Wretchedness Revealed
Considine, the ~ one of the alternates or subcapitals situated at strategic places within the Haacobin Empire.
Alternats were founded to allow the Empire to keep greater control over it subject states, most of which lie beyond
inveterately threwdish land, well past easy reach. Large armies and navies are kept at each alternat, ready to venture
forth and chastise any overweening state or peer or defend the lands against the monsters. In the Soutlands, the
Considine is the larger, older and therefore senior of two alternates, the other being the Serenine, farther south.

T

he prentices were not even properly awake when the Lamplighter-Marshal, Sebastipole,
the Marshal's adjutant, accompanying secretaries and a small quarto of lifeguards left in three
lectums that next morning. Preparing for parade with a heavy heart, Rossamünd marched out
with his subdued fellows to find the entire pageant-of-arms in similar mood. The sudden
departure of their beloved Marshal to duties in the Idlewild was not so uncommon, yet word had
got about that it was a sis edisserum that had taken him away — and this was shocking.
Rossamünd could almost sense resentment bubbling under this veneer of fine martial order as
they gathered on the Grand Mead.
The weather-shared the oppressive mood. There had been frost that morning after a clear,
cold night. But as the sun slimbed to its meridian, powerful winds blew from south of southeast,
their gusts only partly foiled by Winstermill's ponderous walls. Clouds so thick they were almost
black arrived on its threatening breath, and the tang of rain and lightning was heavy on the air.
Standing preeminent before the entire population of the manse, Podious Whympre, Master-ofClerks and next in line of command after the Lamplighter-Marshal, looked out upon all those now
under his sway, peacock-proud, and peacock-preened. Laudibus Pile, Witherscrawl and his
genuflection of sycophants stood close behind.
Wooden screens had been pegged to the ground with guy ropes and stakes to spare Whympre
and his tail any ruffling buffets of wind. His audience simply endured and, during the course of
the pageant, many hats found wing in the gusts and crashed into the northern wall or sought the
broad meadows of the Harrowmath.
"Our beloved Lamplighter-Marshal has been recalled to the Considine," Whympre began with
clerkly sobriety. "The Emperor is concerned for the proper administration of his beloved
highroad and seeks an accounting from our own faithful Marshal. A Most Honorable Imperial
Secretary" — murmurs through all ranks — "arrived from High Vesting bearing the directive of
the subcapital late yesterday evening with a sis edisserum marked by the Emperor's own Chief-ofStaff." He took a breath, waiting for the troubled rumbling of the assembly to still. "Therefore,
our dear, dear Marshal was compelled to leave at first change of watch this morning and may well
be gone for an extended time."
Though the lighters and auxiliaries already knew the Lamplighter-Marshal had departed, there
was nevertheless a small roar of dismay at this final confirmation. It was unheard of —
powerfully discomfiting to all — and only with the severest reprimands was a pretense of order
maintained.
"With his absence," the Master-of-Clerks continued, "need must fall to me to take the daily
toil of our glorious manse in hand. I shall endeavor to lead in his stead, in a manner truly
befitting an outpost of the most Serene and Mighty Emperor. In that capacity I shall be forced to
assume the rank of Marshal-Subrogat..." He continued like this for a numbingly long stretch. His
loyal aides did the same, extolling the Master-of-Clerks, inflating his virtues, sounding as if they
were trying to convince those gathered of the clerk-master's fitness to lead. Within all this
gabbling came the first significant announcement: The Master-of-Clerks was to allow vigil-day

visits to Silvernook — beginning on that very day. Even as he said this, near a dozen lentums
began to roll out from the yard, ready to take those interested in a day on the town. In their
delight the wind of many lifted and they began to think their new executive officer a capital
fellow after all. A happy mumbling stirred through the prentices, though Rossamünd did not
share their easily won enthusiasm.
"Button it shut, flabberers, or ye'll all be staying in yer cells for the day!" Grindrod growled
huskily, and stillness was purposefully restored. For the entire pageant till now the lamplightersergeant had been glaring up at the clerk-master, mustachios bristling in disgust. "What does he
know of lighting?" Rossamünd heard him mutter to Benedict.
The Master-of-Clerks mollified them all still further by adding that they could expect roasted
mutton with thick gravy for mains and treacle crowdy for puddings, with rich bully-dicey to be
served at middens for those left behind. Had it been allowed, all the other prentices and many
lampsmen and pediteers and the clerks would have shouted for glee.
"The hearts of the crowd are found in their bellies," Threnody muttered after they were
marched back to the Cypress Walk and dismissed by their unusually subdued officers.
"Perhaps the change of command might be a turn for the good," a prentice pondered a little
too loudly.
"Cleave your tongue to yer teeth, Gail!" Grindrod bawled, sending the loose-lipped prentice
white with fright. "Ye're as shatterbrained as yer nuncle the lector! Pots-and-pans for ye tonight
and the rest of the long week! The marshal-lighter is as fine a man and officer as anyone could
ever hope to share a generation with! And if a single one of ye goes down to Silvernook today,
ye'll have my mark as a baseborn runion fink not worthy of a lighter's fodicar!"
All the lantern-sticks were astounded at his outburst. None said another peep about the
Marshal's departure — good or bad — for fear of another flaring of temper. Not one prentice
took the day in Silvernook either, and if any were disappointed by this, he dared not show it.
Brooding, Rossamünd sat on his cot in his cell. Threnody, having invited herself in, was
perched on his bed chest, her back against the wall.
"Is it just me," said Threnody, "or have the Lamplighter-Marshal's troubles turned out rather
nicely for our new Marshal-Subrogat?"
"I suppose they have," Rossamünd agreed guardedly. "It cannot be helped that the clerkmaster is next in rank." Mister Sebastipole does have a notion that someone might be seeking the
Marshal's ruin. "How long would it take a message to get from here to the Considine and back?"
he asked.
"You would need a fortnight," Threnody said huffily. "Why?"
Rossamünd scratched at his bandage. "What has my head turning is that Mister Sebastipole
saying yesterday that someone in the subcapital must have already heard about the rever-man and
was calling for an explanation. Barely a week has passed—"
"You already knew the Marshal was leaving on a sis edisserum and you did not say?"
"It was not my information to tell!" Rossamünd returned indignantly.
"Oh truly? Very convenient." Threnody rolled her eyes. "Will you always be this dim?"
"I cannot say," Rossamünd countered, an angry rush in his belly. "Will you always be this
rude!" His mouth spoke before his kinder thoughts could marshal themselves to intervene.
Threnody gaped.
"Oi, Rosey!" called Arabis down the steps of the cell row. "I saw your old middens-chum
blubbering on the Mead."
Rossamünd leaped off his cot and put his head out of the cell door. "You saw what?"
"Aye, what's-his-name — the Numps or somewhat like it." The older prentice shrugged.
"The daffy cove looked mighty put out by something."
Numps! Blubbering on the Mead?
Leaving Threnody flabbergasted in his cell, Rossamünd was up the steps, down the passage
and out on to the Cypress Walk in a twinkling. Before he was clear of the Walk, he could hear a

distant, agonized wailing coming from the Grand Mead, and very quickly he recognized it as
coming from the throat of Numps. There were rapid steps behind: Threnody was following.
Clear of the manse, he saw — at the farther end of the Grand Mead on the edge of the gravel
drive — Numps, hampered between two hefty troubardiers of the Master-of-Clerks' own footguards. The glimner was writhing and pulling against their restraint. Rossamünd had never seen
him so wild and so awfully animated.
Then he saw why.
Upon the gaunt beams of the scaffold, the great dead tree that stood at the northern end of the
manse, great tendrils of still verdant bloom were hanging upon the gaunt branches to dry and
slowly die. As Rossamünd well knew, glimbloom will not live long out of water, becoming
parched and yellow, its tiny leaves finally rotting to slime. Between the ladders and the many,
many barrows holding the bloom stood the Master-of-Clerks directing an industrious band of
peoneers with remonstrative gusto. Beside him a man Rossamünd recognized as the portly
works-general stood, shamefaced, determinedly avoiding the sight of the grief-racked glimner
while Witherscrawl wrote Phoebë-knows-what in a portable ledger.
The old dead tree was already draped with such a vast amount of bloom that it looked to have
wondrously returned to life; and the stuff was so vigorous-green and thick it could have come
from only one place: Numps' secluded undercroft.
A shout of anguish escaped Rossamünd before he even knew to stop it. He ran the length of
the gravel drive, heedless of any shouts or reprimands, groaning, "...This is all my fault, this is all
my fault..."
Doctor Crispus ran into the narrow scope of Rossamünd's panicked vision, striding fast on his
long, stiltlike legs, crying something to the troubardiers that Rossamünd could not understand in
his rush. With a great waving of hands and arms, the physician remonstrated with the foot-guards
— who did not relax their detention of Numps — before turning away sharply to confront the
Master-of-Clerks.
As Rossamünd got closer he could see that one of the men had a pincer grip on Numps' arm
while the other corralled him with the shaft of his poleax. Though the two foot-guards were much
heavier men than the glimner, they were hard-pressed to keep him in hand. The prentice pulled
up smartly before the struggling three, skidding on the quartz pebbles of the drive, cut to his heart
at the expression of utter desolation wrenching Numps' already distorted, tear-washed face. Bent
with agony, the glimner howled, "My friend! My friend! They're killing my friend!" pushing and
pulling at the grip of the foot-guards.
"Let him go! What are you doing?" Rossamünd hollered.
"Clap up your squealing, little sprat!" one of the soldiers spat. "Get back to your quarters!"
For added effect the man shied at Rossamünd with a steel-shot boot, roughly shoving him away.
Rossamünd yelped as the force of the push sat him on the gravel. All he wanted to do now
was set Numps free. A burst of Frazzard's powder in the foot-guards' vile puds would have
served perfectly, but the prentice was without his salumanticum.
Amid the horrible yawling, he heard a shout of anger behind him.
"Poke at him like that again, you bamboozle-winded dung sop, and you'll spend the rest of
Chill confusing your head for your tail!" It was Threnody, arriving to intervene. She planted
herself before the lofty foot-guard, hand raised to temple in a wit's telltale attitude.
The man looked down at her, his expression thunderous. "Shove it up your wheeze-end, little
harridan!"
His fellow foot-guard glanced at Threnody hesitantly; however, Rossamünd was sure he
could see nervous perspiration twinkling on the fellow's brow.
"All this fuss and trouble is hardly worthy of you, my people," the Master-of-Clerks
declaimed, interrupting the contest of wills as he strode imperiously toward them. "The bloom
must be left to die. They are well likely to be responsible for that wicked gudgeon finding its way
in and causing our generous, unfortunate Marshal such embarrassment!"

Rossamünd knew this was a bald, pettifogging lie: monsters did not care two figs for bloom.
"That's not tr—"
The Master-of-Clerks raised his hand. "Silence! Stop your rabble-rousing and get back to
your duties! I will not tolerate such affronts. What a foolish weight of grief wasted over a few
dripping weeds. Foot-guards, stuff a rag in its nose and return this one to its place of labor—"
"Your sturdy roughs have done their worst, man!" Doctor Crispus said with cold deliberation,
glowering at one of the fellows as if he should know better. "As the manse's physician, I declare
this poor fellow has taken a great strain of soul today and now needs a gentler hand. By the rights
granted me through the Accord of Menschen over the health of pensioned military persons, I
demand he be released to my care and relieved of any more manhandling."
"We are not at war, sir!" Whympre contradicted.
"I think you shall find that the Accord differs with you, sir." Crispus was not to be so easily
beaten. "As would the brave lighters out there on the road."
The Master-of-Clerks considered, eyes narrowing, lips pursing. "This is most decidedly
irregular, Doctor. I would advise you to go back to your infirmary and keep your opinions within
its four walls."
"The clerking of our Emperor's manse is for you to determine, sir — the healing of its limbs is
mine." Crispus stood tall, looking down on the clerk-master with the peremptory authority of the
learned. "Inside the infirmary's four walls and out!"
Tear-diluted spittle was running freely from Numps' nose and mouth as he began to sag in the
cruel grip of his restrainers.
With a cold glare the Master-of-Clerks eventually nodded. "I can see the wretch is
ridiculously distressed. Please! Take him and set him to ease if he needs it. He will see the
wisdom of today as time brings clarity. Guard-Sergeant? You may let that Numplings fellow
go."
The troubardiers obeyed and Numps collapsed. Rossamünd was at his side in an instant.
"Lady Threnody." The Master-of-Clerks gave a slight, barely respectful bow to the girl
lighter. "If I see you attempt to strive again I shall call your mother here and have her take you
away." While the peoneers worked callously on, he strode into the manse, Witherscrawl, the
works-general and foot-guards scuttering after.
"Look at them leave to heel, like the curs they are!" Threnody hissed.
Numps lay curled about himself, making strange gulping noises, whispering "Oh, my friend...
oh, my friend" to himself between sobbing gasps, his eyes red and swollen, his cheeks gray and
drawn. Oblivious to the sharp pebbles of the drive, Rossamünd knelt and embraced the glimner
as best he could, an awkward, inadequate reach across the man's convulsing back.
Doctor Crispus was unwilling to provoke Numps further by taking him into the manse.
Calling for two porters and a stretcher, he had the glimner taken to the lantern store. Rossamünd
and Threnody accompanied them as, whimpering and unresponsive, Numps was set gingerly on
his pallet in a small, nestlike domestic nook of the store.
"I shall return presently with a soothing draught for the poor fellow," Crispus instructed
Rossamünd. "There is no circumstance under which this would have happened if the Marshal
was still present," he concluded heatedly.
"My , how kitten does play with father cat away," Threnody concurred. "The clerk-master
behaves a little differently without someone to check him."
"Indeed, my dear. The worm has turned, I think." With a bow, the physician left.
Speechless with shame and regret, Rossamünd could think of no comfort as Numps lay curled
about himself, rocking on his cot by the clean, cold light of the well-kept great-lamp. When he
did finally find voice, all he could say for a time was, "Sorry... I'm so sorry."
But all he got in reply from Numps was, over and over, "My friend... you're killed again..."
"If I had known the Master-of-Clerks would treat your baths so, there is nothing that would
have made me tell of them!" Rossamünd said bitterly, tears threatening.

"There's no way you could have guessed ahead to that fellow's wretchedness, Rossamünd,"
Threnody murmured, touching him on the arm and actually managing to bring some comfort.
"I'm sure Dolours would say something much the same were she here," the girl added as a
qualification for her soothing.
When Crispus returned, it was a bitter fortune that the glimner, so insensible with shock, went
quickly to sleep under the influence of the physician's soother. Crispus, Threnody and
Rossamünd sat for a while by Numps' side, watching over him.
"What is going to happen to him, Doctor?" whispered Rossamünd.
"He will recover, my boy." The physician smiled kindly. "I have seen him through worse
and will see him through again."
Rossamünd was in doubt. "He should have gone with Mister Sebastipole."
"I do not think the Considine is a good place for him either," Crispus replied. "In fact, you
would have a hard time getting him out of Winstermill. It was remarkable that he even ventured
up on to the Mead today."
Rossamünd sat in silent thought. "Doctor Crispus, what will happen to Winstermill — to us
all — without the Marshal here?"
The physician sighed, deep and sad. "I have not one notion, my boy, though if today's
travesty is an indicator of our new leader's method, then it just might be an unhappy end for us
all."
"Here I was beginning to enjoy the life." Threnody's muttered words were heavy with irony.
"I was telling Rossamünd before, good doctor, that events have fallen very well for our dastardly
clerk-master."
"Why, child, I suppose they have." Crispus stroked his chin. "Yet I can hardly conceive of
him orchestrating all the manifold trials that have beset us and the brave Marshal most of all."
"I have been a pupil of Mother's long enough to know only a prod here and a coaxing there is
enough to bring another down," Threnody waxed sagaciously. "Their troubles do the rest for
you."
The physician looked at her for a moment. "Is that so, child? I wonder at the rather bleak
nature of the lessons your good mother holds."
Rossamünd marveled at this glimpse of the bizarre life the girl must have led before she
joined the lighters.
Inevitably Crispus' duties called him away, and middens' call coaxed Threnody back to the
manse.
Rossamünd was left to continue the observance alone. Sitting there in the quiet of the store,
he began to arrange a plan in his grieving thoughts: a scheme to offer some small consolation to
the harrowed man. It was quite simple, and required only a clear occasion to be done. He would
go to the scaffold and rescue what bloom he could. The best of time was mains, when the manse
was a little stupid with the filling of its myriad stomachs, and the vigilance of its watch directed
more outward to the Harrowmath. Prentices were allowed a relative freedom of movement
during meals, and he was going to make full use of the privilege. Rossamünd would take a smock
and a barrow — of which there was a conspicuously ample supply all about this part of the Gutter
— and, like a gardener, steal on to the Mead and take back the bloom. The plan fixed so firmly in
his mind as the only way he might make any kind of amends, he determined to go through with it
that very evening.
He stood to put the plan into motion. The smock would be from his own trunk. Of all its
intended uses, he reflected, impersonating a groundsman was probably not among them. The
wooden barrow — found in the lantern store itself — he hid in a gap between the Principal Stair
and front boarded wall of the store, wedging it behind a rain barrel, and with it a rusty fodicar to
aid him in hooking the bloom down.
Preparations done, the prentice looked in on the insensible glimner one last time and returned
to the manse.

*

*

*

*

*

The evening was as blustery a one as Rossamünd could recall. Clouds blossomed and
expanded, unraveling from horizon to horizon over the whole Harrowmath: low, mountainousdark, and turned an oddly luminescent, muddy hue by the westering sun they hid. Southerly,
loam-perfumed winds blustered over the shorter walls of the Low Gutter; wild, freezing vortices
spun across the Mead and down the Cypress Walk, prodding Rossamünd with every gust,
bringing to his cold aching ears the angry hiss of the tempest-tossed grasses on the plain.
Gripping the thin linen smock and its meager extra warmth about him, the prentice skipped
down the postern stair and scurried along the poorly lit lanes of the Gutter. His healing crown
aching under the bandages, he wished he still had his hat to protect his head from the blustery
buffeting. This was a bad night to be in the open, but it was a good night for clandestine or
nefarious deeds. He reckoned upon less chance of discovery or questions by this route, and his
reckoning proved right. Not one other soul crossed his way but a gray grimalkin, one of the tribe
of mousing cats allowed free roam of the whole fortress. Wise enough to leave the vermin to
themselves on such an ugly eve, it blinked knowingly at him from its shelter beneath a stack of
unused hogsheads, puncheons and barrels.
Past the bill-posting trees, across the All-About, by the Magazine and between the
warehouses and work-stalls he went, arriving at the lantern store in a state of thrumming anxiety.
He hastily pulled the barrow from behind its rain-barrel nook. Rossamünd pushed it up the long
cartage-ramp — the Axial — to the edge of the Grand Mead, the axle creaking quietly and the
wheel making a pleasant, continuous crunch on the gravel. The Mead proved as empty of people
as it had been that very first evening the coach had deposited him at Winstermill. Back then he
had thought the manse huge and vacant, but now he knew the Mead's current state of
inoccupation made a lie of the fortress's hectic daytime activity. Honey-hued window-lights
flickered invitingly — glimmering like watching eyes in the gatehouses, the Cursory, the
Feuterers' Cottage and the Yardsman's Row. Snatches of ribald songs reached him modulated on
the wind's frenetic breath, but the great, walled valley before him was deserted.
Rossamünd paused. He knew that it was possible hidden eyes were looking from cavities in
the structures where the most faithful house-watchmen kept a diligent eye. There was very little
he could do about these unseen observers but hope his thin ruse of a groundsman on a late errand
would fool them.
Rossamünd took a steadying breath.
Lit behind by one of the few lamps on the grounds, the Scaffold was unmistakable: a stark
shadow of limbs so unnaturally perpendicular that Rossamünd could well see how it earned its
name. The dying bloom still thickly furbished every branch as high as the peoneers' ladders had
reached, warping and writhing violently in stormy gusts. Touched with a ghastly yellow hue, the
plants were clearly drying, their vigor failing. Steeling himself, Rossamünd pushed the barrow
steadily along the left-hand edge of the drive, walking with a show of purpose directly to the dead
tree, hurrying only when he crossed the brightly lit ground before the manse's front doors. Under
the tree, the hanging bloom was far too high for him to get with his diminutive reach. Even the
corroding fodicar was little help, the single hook requiring impossible precision to snag the wildly
wind-dancing tendrils. Over and over Rossamünd swung and poked at these elusive targets till he
was near to sobbing with the futility of the task. Too often when he did achieve a hooking, the
failing plant would tear and shower him with its wilting leaflets.
Frogs and toads! Confinations will be starting soon.
It had been his great Plan with a capital P to fill the barrow with great armfuls of the stuff,
but now he was hard-pressed to gather a handful. He threw the fodicar down in disgust and it
bounced butt-end first off the iron-hard roots of the Scaffold, flipped over several times and
skidded clatteringly to a stop against the wall of the manse.

With a clinch of dread at such a din, Rossamünd froze — he had never meant to hurl the
fodicar so hard or so far — and instantly realized he need not have toiled so fruitlessly. For there,
all about the fodicar's final rest were intact fragments of bloom, ripped from the tree by the gale,
scattered now like summer fallen blossoms on the Scaffold's leeward side. The prentice's entire
soul leaped for the joy of it, but quickly squeezed to fright again as the noise of watchmen stirring
in one of the many structures on the Mead's edge reached him. With terror's thrill, Rossamünd
dashed the barrow over to the fodicar. Voices were becoming more distinct, sounding nearer,
coming from the coach yard around the corner. He grabbed at all the bloom he could reach,
dumping it rapidly in the barrow. The crunch of a footfall on gravel was all too clear. The
prentice snatched up the fallen lantern-crook, took grip of the barrow's handles and hurried off
across the Mead, dark excitement broiling in his innards. At any moment he expected to be
halted. He forced himself not to run. With every step nearer the Axial, he dared to hope he might
escape unseen, and hope and dread seesawed desperately till — at last! — he was trundling down
the ramp descending to the Low Gutter. Only when he was back by the gap between the Principal
Stair and the lantern store did Rossamünd finally begin again to breathe.
Not waiting to discover if he had been seen or followed, the prentice fumbled off his smock,
tipped all the bloom from the barrow onto it, put the barrow back behind the rain barrel, and the
fodicar with it. Rolling up the smock and hefting this bundle over his shoulder, he scampered
back through the comparative calm of the Low Gutter, up the Postern Stair and into his own cell
just as mains was ending.
Never had he prized the privacy of his cell as much as then. In the quiet of the tiny room,
with the door shut, Rossamünd spread the smock out, and heart a-thump with hope, sorted
through all the scraps of bloom. He was quickly and bitterly dismayed to find much of the stuff
terribly yellowed. Yet among all the dying bloom-shreds he found six still-healthy tendrils, limp
but not beyond restoring. He could have whooped for joy.
His messmates began moving and stomping about outside, shifting about the cell row as they
readied for bed. Rossamünd got into his own nightclothes and, with a quick check out the cell
door, made three rapid forays. Some of the other prentices gave him odd looks but none stopped
him. Bare feet slapping on the cold slate, he carried water from the cistern, via his biggin, to pour
into the chamber pot. Thus the aquatic environment the bloom required was in some way
restored. Rossamünd took his time tenderly arranging the survivors so that each was properly
submerged.
His nerves were so tightly strung, a soft bang at the door spooked him mightily.
"It's douse-lanterns, Bookchild," came a hard, warning voice.
Intent on tending his haul, Rossamünd had missed the day's-end cry. All clatter and flurry,
the prentice tried to hurry the last two precious sprigs into the chamber pot.
The cell door opened and in thrust the lamplighter-sergeant's head. "Did ye not hear the—"
he began, then saw the bloom. Grindrod's eyes went wide, but sharp anger was quickly replaced
with understanding. "Where did ye get those, prentice?"
"I— ah— from the— the—" Rossamünd floundered: it was theft either way — a flogging
offense, twelve of the best under the lictor's hand.
"From the Scaffold?"
"Aye, Lamplighter-Sergeant."
"Good man, Master Lately. As ye were." The merest hint of an untypical smile showed on
Grindrod's face. "Douse yer lantern, the day's deeds are done, lad... and keep those well out of
sight. What our new Marshal doesn't fathom won't turn into trouble."
Confused, relieved, Rossamünd pushed the chamber pot under his cot, tumbled all the dead
bloom together with his smock, stuffed it into the bed chest and turned his bright-limn. In the
fading light he readied for sleep. His heart still pattered fast and he lay awake for a long time,
astounded at his own audacity and wondering why Grindrod had just abetted him in his crime.

*

*

*

*

*

Immediately after the sunup call "A lamp! A lamp to light your path!" rang through the cell
row, Rossamünd was out of his cot and pulling the chamber pot with its leafy guests out from
under his bunk. He had continued to use the pot for its intended purpose during the night, having
learned from Numps that one's night waters were good for the bloom. Seltzerman 1st Class
Humbert had reluctantly said the same when, amid much snickering and guffawing from his
fellows, Rossamünd had sought to confirm the fact during readings. Nevertheless, one of the
bloom sprigs had not survived the night, and he was down to five.
While the other lads washed, Rossamünd hid the pot between his bed chest and the wall under
his valise and salumanticum to foil the questing chambermaids on their morning rounds.
Food gobbled (farrats, raisins and small beer) and barely more than an awkward “good
morning” exchanged with Threnody, Rossamünd was rushing back to his cell, an idea
illuminating in his mind like a thermistor's bolt. He fished out the chamber pot from its hide, took
out his lark-lamp, prized off the lugs and opened the top of the bell. Into the glass-bound cavity
he managed to fit all five fronds, stuffing the sixth in with all the dead bloom wrapped in his
smock and hiding it again in the bed chest. He filled the lark-lamp with water from the cistern
and by breakfast-end had the bell-top secured back in place and the lamp safely back in his bed
chest.
All through the rest of the day, he was in anxious expectation of discovery. At morning
parade, he waited for the Master-of-Clerks to arrive and announce the wicked theft of bloomrubbish from beneath the Scaffold. Through morning evolutions Rossamünd kept looking guiltily
over at the gaunt tree, convinced a mercer would run up and announce that "some unknown
miscreant had meddled with the rightfully exposed collucia plants!"
None of this happened.
By middens, Rossamünd was eager to restore the rescued glimbloom to Numps.
The glimner was still in bed, sitting up, sipping at some fine-smelling broth — probably a
kindness of Doctor Crispus — and looking utterly spent from all his grieving. Gratified that the
man was cared for, nevertheless Rossamünd felt his heart ache to see Numps so woebegone.
"Mister Numps," Rossamünd ventured, "I—I tried to save your bloom yesternight, but... but
this was all I could get. The rest was too high off the ground." He proffered the bloom-packed
lark-lamp and the glimner's eyes went so round Rossamünd feared they might pop right from their
sockets. For a terrible beat or three of his anxious heart, the prentice thought he had woefully
miscalculated, and simply added to the glimner's distress.
"You rescued poor Numps' poor friends," the man managed brokenly. He took the small
lamp in his shaking hands and gradually his hauntedness gave way to profound delight as joy
blossomed into ecstasy. "Oh, my friends!" Numps cried, in both shouts and tears. "Oh, my
friends!" The unscarred side of his face became wet with weeping, yet the riven side stayed dry,
his ruined eye tearless.

19
Billeting Day
fetchman also fetcher, bag-and-bones man, ashcarter or thew-thief (“strength-stealer”). Someone who carries the
bodies of the fallen from the field of battle, taking them to the manouvra — or field hospital. Despite their necessary
and extremely helpful labors, fetchmen are often resented by pediteers as somehow responsible for the deaths of the
wounded comrades they take who often die later of their injuries. Indeed, they are regarded as harbingers of death,
sapping their own side of strength, and as such are kept out of sight till they are needed.

D

espite the dramatic events, many of the lantern-sticks were largely unperturbed by the
Marshal's departure. Grindrod and Benedict did their utmost to preserve the routine. The next
day the prentices had just completed the usual afternoon reading on Our Mandate and Matter with
Seltzerman Humbert when Benedict hustled into the lectury declaring in amazement, "They're
holding Billeting Day early!"
Almost the moment these words were out, the grandiose figure of the Master-of-Clerks, the
Marshal-Subrogat himself, appeared at the lectury door, gracing them all with his presence. He
held his chin at a dignified tilt. As always, the man was served by his ubiquitous retinue:
Laudibus Pile, Witherscrawl, and now Fleugh the under-clerk; the master-surveyor with diagrams
of the manse permanently gripped under his arm; and two troubardier foot-guards. With them
also came a lanky, frightening-looking fellow dressed all in a sash of sturdy proofed silk, neck
thickly wrapped in a long wooden scarf yet — most oddly — his chest and shoulders and arms
were bare, despite the aching chill, showing too-pale against all the black. His head was bald, and
a thin dark arrow pointed up his face from chin to absent hairline, its tines splaying out over each
brow. He was a wit. More disconcerting still was that his eyes were completely black — white
orbs, just glistening dark. This was some strange trick of chemistry Rossamünd had not heard of.
The combination of this blank, pitch-dark stare with Pile's snide, parti-hued gaze stilled the whole
room as they moved within.
With a thump of determined footfalls Grindrod appeared behind them all, muttering to
himself, his face screwed up in silent invective. "Sit" was all he said.
The prentices obeyed with meek alacrity. When all shuffling and snuffling ceased, the
Master-of-Clerks paced before them, hands behind his back, puckering his lips and squinting at
the platoon as if shrewdly appraising them all.
"Brave prentices," he declaimed, "you have worked at your practicing with admirable zeal
and laudable facility. Fully confident in your fitness, I am convinced you are ready for full,
glorious service as Emperor's lighters, and have decided it timely for you to be granted your
billets and to be sent promptly to them."
That had most of the prentices scratching their heads, pained frowns of lugubrious thought
creasing several brows. Does that mean it's Billeting Day or what?
How would he know what the state of our fitness for service is? was the spin of Rossamünd's
own thinking. He has naught to do with us!
With a harsh, self-conscious throat-clearing, Grindrod stood forward, clearly struggling to
contain his temper. "Sounds an admirable conclusion, sir, but the lantern-sticks bain't ready for
the work. Ye let a half-trained lad out on the road by himself and ye might as well toss 'im
straight to the fetchman!"
"Pshaw! I'll not have your womanish obstructions, Lamplighter-Sergeant-of-Prentices." The
Master-of-Clerks enunciated Grindrod's full title in the manner of a put-down. "They are required
out on that road to make up for the appalling losses incurred under my predecessor."
The Lamplighter-Sergeant went purple with indignant rage, but the Master-of-Clerks carried

on, not allowing the man an opportunity to press any further dissent.
"Staffing at the cothouses must be restocked. We have twenty-one — no, twenty-two" — he
corrected himself with an enigmatic look to Threnody, sitting straightbacked at the front of the
room — "hale souls trained in the lampsman's labors, and as ready as anyone can be, surely, to
wind a simple glowing weed in and out its chamber. It is a terrible waste of a resource and one I
have decided can be better employed filling these gaps on the road than lolling about here being
taught the same thing over and over. It is not difficult work, Sergeant. If they have not come to
grips with the task by now, I fail to see how another month will make it so."
"Another month is all the difference, sir!" Grindrod glowered. "They're bare-breeched
bantlings who set to whimperin' at the slightest speak of bogles! Ye should be hiring those
blighted sell-swords bivoucked outside the Nook, or get them lardy magnates in the Placidine
itself to spare a platoon or two of their blighted domesticars! Either way, sir, trained, professional
men-at-arms used to the rigors of war. Ye might not know, sir, hidin' behind yer ledgers and quill
pots, that it's war out upon the road, sir, and it's we lowly lighters who are in the van!"
The Master-of-Clerks bridled for a moment and then, with admirable equanimity, said
soothingly, "I'm sure you're a fellow who knows his business well enough when teaching a poor
lad his first clues, but it now falls to me to choose their best uses. That is to be the end of it
Lamplighter-Sergeant — I do not want to be put in the position of having to take you in firmer
hand. Indexer Witherscrawl," he said, dismissing Grindrod with a turn of his gorgeously
bewigged head, "read the tally if you please."
The sour indexer stepped forward, glared at the prentices — at every single one — and
especially at Threnody. "Harkee, ye little scrubs! Here is the Roll of Billets, of who will go
where and when they will leave. Listen well — I shall tell this only the once!"
What! The prentices could not quite believe this: they were to be denied the full honors of a
beautiful and especial ceremony. There were supposed to be martial musics; the whole manse
was meant to turn out in respect at the boys' success in prenticing and their coming into full rank
as lampsmen. A sussurus of deep displeasure stirred about the boys.
Grindrod did nothing to quell them, simply folding his arms. In fact, he showed open pride in
the prentices' muttering rebellion.
"I said quiet!" Witherscrawl shouted, and a foot-guard rapped the floor with the shaft end of
his poleax, its cracking report startling the whole room to dumbness.
With a foul sneer, the indexer raised a tall, thin ledger close to his face and from it began to
read out names in letter-fall order: Arabis to go to Cothallow, Childebert to Sparrowstall, Egadis
to Tumblesloe Cot just beyond the Roughmarch, and so on.
Attention focused.
"Mole to Ashenstall..."
Onion Mole went white with dismay. The other prentices winced, Rossamünd with them. A
long way east, Ashenstall was one of the harder billets on the road, isolated and with few vigilday rests.
Apprehension grew. They could not assume only the kinder billets would be given.
"Wheede to Mirthalt..." droned the indexer, "Wrangle to... Bitterbolt..."
With a chill, Rossamünd knew his name was next, languishing at the end of the lists along
with Threnody's...
"Bookchild to Wormstool..."
... and this chill became a frigid blank.
Some of the other prentices gasped.
Wormstool!
This was the last — the very last — cothouse on the Wormway, well east of Ashenstall, with
only the grim Imperial bastion of Haltmire between it and the Ichormeer. Built at the “ignoble
end of the road,” Wormstool was no place for newly promoted prentice-lampsmen. Situated too
near the sodden fringe of the dread swamp, it was held as one of the toughest billets of all. Only

those who volunteered ever went there, yet here he was, a mere prentice, being sent. The
Ichormeer had once been just a frightful fable to him. Now Rossamünd was going to live and
work as a neighbor to its very borders, where all the bogles and the vilest hugger-muggers that
ever dragged themselves from putrid mud haunted and harried. Absorbed in his shocked thoughts
at this revelation, he did not hear where Threnody had been sent.
Witherscrawl finished his recitation.
The Master-of-Clerks presented himself again. "I will be wanting you all to your billets as
soon as can be done. With time to travel in consideration, those farther out will leave sooner.
Therefore those prentices stationed farthest away will be leaving on the first post of tomorrow
morn. Well done to you all, my fine fellows — you are now all full lampsmen!"
Confused and silent, the prentices were dismissed and that was that: Billeting Day — such as
it had been — was over, an insulting sham.
The Master-of-Clerks left without any further acknowledgment, taking his “tail” with him.
Grindrod followed, and an angry muttered conference could be heard out in the hallway,
terminating suddenly with the Master-of-Clerks' high clear voice saying, "Cease your querulous
bickerings, Sergeant-lighter! It will be as I have decided it. They have been sent where needed.
If you are so concerned for the children, then get back to them and make certain they are ready for
their great adventure. Good day!"
At first Rossamünd's fellows were bemused. As the day progressed most were reconciled
with their early promotions and many proved pleased with their billets, however untimely and
however tawdrily they had been portioned. At lale — held indoors owing to inclement weather
— they buzzed and boasted excitedly to each other about the various merits of their new posts,
those billeted at the same cothouse gathering together in excited twos or threes. Every lad
congratulated the others for their good fortune and the 7q extra they would all receive each month
now that they were lampsmen 3rd class. For Onion Mole and even more so Rossamünd there was
baffled commiseration: he was the only prentice to be billeted at the ignoble end of the road.
"Why are they sending you so far, Rosey boy?" asked Arabis, still smiling about his prime
posting at Cothallow, one of the smartest cothouses on the road.
Hands raised, Rossamünd shrugged.
"I reckon you'll be going tomorrow morning, then?" Pillow wondered aloud.
"It's a handy thing ye've had practice with yer potives." Smellgrove patted him on the back.
"Aye." Wheede grinned. "The baskets will have to watch they don't get a pud full of
bothersalts."
Rossamünd ducked his head, grateful for their fumbling encouragements.
Threnody had guzzled her saloop and was rising to leave.
"Where are you going?" he asked her quickly.
"Out from here," she answered flatly.
"Where are you billeted?"
"Didn't you hear?" she asked tartly. "I'm going to Dovecote Bolt. That Odious Podious
thinks he is such a funny fellow — told me my mother would appreciate me being so close."
"We'll be billet-mates!" cried Plod happily.
"Oh, hazzah," Threnody replied with a wry twist of her mouth, and departed.
*

*

*

*

*

For the rest of the day, as Benedict strove, in Grindrod's absence, to keep the animated
prentices in line, Rossamünd's mind was a hasty turning of half thoughts and unhappy
conclusions. He was leaving — packed off posthaste to the worst billet in the land. Most likely
he was leaving for good, to die at the hands of some ravenous nicker fresh plucked from the ooze.
He had to tell Numps — just as Mister Sebastipole had done — that he might see the glimner for
a long time. Once again, mains became the prentice's chance to venture out. When the meal

came around he took only a hard loaf of pong to chew “on the foot” and hastened to the lantern
store.
As he went to leave the mess hall, he passed Threnody, back from making her treacle in the
kitchens. She snatched at his arm. "I must talk with you," she hissed.
Rossamünd wrenched free. "Not now, Threnody. I must visit Numps to tell him I'm going,"
he insisted in return.
She glowered at him. "What do you have to do that is more important than me? I have things
to tell you — a surprise."
"Truly, Threnody, it must wait," he declared, pulling his arm free of her and dashing off,
leaving her stunned and scowling.
In the early night he ran down to the Low Gutter. The sweet smell of rain-washed air — the
promise of showers — was blowing up from the southeast. Passing through Door 143 just as
water began to fall, Rossamünd emerged from the shelves as his ready, if somewhat forced, smile
of friendliness became a puzzled grimace. Numps was not in his usual seat by the glow of the
postless great-lamp and the never diminishing pile of panes. Nor was he down the next aisle of
shelves getting mineral fluids or other such things for cleaning stubborn crust.
"Mister Numps?" he called.
The rain a-hammered on the roof.
Ringing ears.
Nothing.
"Mister Numps?" He turned slowly by the glimner's empty seat, hoping the fellow might just
shuffle out from behind a barrel or stack of lantern-windows. Horrid thoughts of some frightful
crisis began to intrude into Rossamünd's imagination, yet there was no evidence of trouble.
Rossamünd searched down every aisle and behind any pile he could see: no Numps. Destroying
his bloom is one thing, but surely he is too important to be hurt or carried off? Rossamünd's mind
cogged. No one could be bothered, even if they did remember him. He thought of the undercroft
and the old bloom baths. Surely not there? It's been boarded up and blocked... This was the only
alternative he knew.
Careful not to attract attention with any untoward huff or hustle, the prentice slipped through
the mazelike interstices between the work buildings, trying to find the path Numps had taken him
that one wet day. Twice he thought he had got himself irrevocably lost, yet, though seen only
once, the particular features of the twisting route were quickly familiar again and Rossamünd was
soon dashing down the tunnel-like alley. He skidded into the discarded square and its gurgling
drains, startling a sparrow that had been bobbing by the sunken grate. The entrance to the
undercroft had indeed been sealed with boards, but these had been pulled away and collected in a
tidy stack by the grate. Next to this stack sat an equally orderly collection of the bolts used to pin
the boards in place, partly piled on top of a soiled official ordinance bill stringently demanding
everyone to go away in painfully formal terms. Kneeling in the wet, the prentice leaned over the
grate and tried to reach under as he had observed Numps do, to feel about for some kind of catch
or spring or other lever.
"Mister Numps!" he called, hoarse and wary, down the hole while he searched. "Mister
Numps!" Nothing even vaguely catch or latchlike presented itself to his questing fingers.
"Oh hallo, Mister Rossamünd." The soft voice of the glimner echoed strangely from below,
giving Rossamünd a fright. "I reckoned you were a guardsman fellow come to take my bloom
again."
"Mister Numps!" With rushing relief, Rossamünd thought he could just spot the pale oval of
Numps' upturned face in the dark of the subterranean stair. "Are you safe? Are you hurt again?"
"Oh dear... I don't want to be found by Master-Clerker..." the glimner quavered. "I didn’t
want to be found without Mister ‘Pole here."
Rossamünd smiled sadly. How he wished he could provide the glimner with a greater sense
of safety. Instead he had things to tell that he knew would be hard for the poor man.

"I have to go too, Mister Numps," he began. "They're sending me away..."
"Oh... oh dear..." Numps sighed, sounding bewildered. He must have climbed higher in his
distress, for his pallid face became closer. "Numps' friends all going..."
"The Master-of-Clerks called Billeting Day today," Rossamünd confirmed, "and I am leaving
to my cothouse — and there's nothing I can do about it."
"Tell Mister ‘Pole — he won't let you be sent away. Even poor limpling-head Numps knows
it's too soon for prentices to go a-working. Write Mister ‘Pole, he won't let you go — I have his
address, see..." Numps rummaged about in pockets.
"I will... I will write him a letter," said Rossamünd. "Maybe he can help us, even from the
Considine. Things are so bad with his and the Marshal's leaving. You should stay hiding if you
can, Mister Numps — the fortress is downside up. Will you be able to eat and all?"
"Ah, Mister Rossamünd." Numps tapped his brow. "There are many things Numps knows
that people don't think he knows. There is food a-plenty if you go to the right places." The
glimner was oddly calm. "Besides, Cinnamon's friends are watching over Numps-a-hiding so you
can reckon me as safe."
Rossamünd thought of the sparrow he had startled, pecking at the grate, and smiled. He did
not know what help these little agents of the Duke of Sparrows might be — if that was indeed
what they were. What did that kind of attention mean? He wanted to believe that goodly urchinlords existed, that Numps was well looked out for, but the old common suspicions persisted.
A distant rataplan of the drums meant that mains was at an end and confinations about to
begin.
"I must go, Mister Numps. We will both write to Mister Sebastipole, yes?"
"Yes."
"And you'll stay safe and secret, yes?"
"Yes."
Rossamünd wanted to hug the glimner, but shyness and the grate prevented him. Instead he
just stared into Numps' melancholy eyes, and the man stared back.
"Good-bye!" The prentice reluctantly turned to leave.
"Good-bye, Mister Rossamünd," he heard the glimner call behind him. "Numps won't forget
his new old friend — don't you forget him..."
"Never, Mister Numps!"
Heavy with fear for the glimner's fate, Rossamünd ran back to the manse. For the rest of
confinations he packed, stowed all he had ever possessed and prepared himself for leaving at first
light. In the last few moments before douse-lanterns he lay on his cot and with his stylus hastily
scratched out a letter on a blank page torn from the back of the peregrinate.

To Mister Sebastipole
Lamplighter's Agent & Falseman to the Lamplighter-Marshal of Winstermill
Epistra Scuthae
The Considine
The Patricine
2nd Heimio HIR 1601
Dear Mister Sebastipole,
I have no certainly this will make its way to you, but I try anyway.
I write to you, Mister Sebastipole, on the last night of my prenticing in
Winstermill, for since you left with the Marshal, the Master-of-Clerks has take all
in hand and declared Billeting Day early. Tomorrow I travel to the cothouse of
Wormstool. But it is not this that troubles me. It is rather Mister Numps that I am

worried for. The Master-of-Clerks (he calls himself the Marshal-Subrogat now)
destroyed Mister Numps' bloom (the stuff he was growing down in the deserted
undercroft) the very day you departed, and Mister Numps (as I am sure you can
well imagine) was sorely troubled. I managed to save a little part of it, but the
baths are shattered and most of the bloom is dead. I fear for Mister Numps, that
he isn't safe with only the good Doctor Crispus to watch out for him. Would there be
any way you can help him, or even get him away from the manse?
He thought of adding:

The last I saw of him he still hid where his bloom was once grown.
...but realized the letter might be intercepted and read by unfriendly eyes and so left it out.
Instead he quickly completed the letter.

I hope you and the Lamplighter-Marshal fare well, and that all unjust things
are righted soon.

Rmnd
Rossamünd Bookchild,
Lampsman 3rd Class
HIHF Winstermill
Conduit Vermis
Sulk End

20
On Leaving Winstermill
Idlewild, the ~ officially known as the Placida Solitus, a gathering of client-cities (colonies) along the Imperial
Highroad of the Conduit Vermis. Each town, village or fortress is sponsored by a different state of the Empire —
Brandenbrass, Hergoatenbosch, Quimperpund, Maubergonne, Termagaunt, even Catalain. Established in the late 15 th
century HIR, it is the latest great project of what is grandly termed cicuration — taming by farming; purgation —
taming by force; and bessesation — taming by landscaping, originally proposed by Clementine itself. The Inner
Idlewild or Placidine, from Tumblesloe Cot to the Wight, was declared “refio scutis” — a fenceland — over a decade
ago. This heralded a brilliant success of the great labor of pushing back the monsters and the threwd. The marches
from the Wight to Haltmire — otherwise known a the Paucitine (also the Frugelle) — are still considered ditchland.

I

n the clear, bright and oppressively cold morning Rossamünd watched Winstermill
recede as the post-lentum took him away. Threnody sat opposite him in the cabin, snuggled in a
nest of furs. The first he knew of her joining him was her appearance on the Grand Mead that
morning, baggage and all, as he waited for the lentum. Originally billeted at Dovecote Bolt, the
girl was not supposed to be here in the carriage, the first to take freshly promoted prentices out to
their new home. Somehow late the day before, she had succeeded in having her posting changed
and was now with him on the road to Wormstool. Perhaps this was what she had been so intent
on telling him the evening before. "It's too dangerous just for one" was all she had said in
explanation as they had waited on the cold Mead earlier that morning. "I'll keep watch on your
flanks, and you'll keep watch on mine."
Rossamünd wondered briefly how the besotted Plod would feel about her change of
destination. She was surely the most gorgeously accoutred lamplighter along the whole of the
Wormway in her scarlet and gold harness and mass of midnight ringlets. Under one arm she
clutched a day-bag, while a linen package and a mysterious round box sat on the seat beside. One
hand was kept warm in a fuzzy white snuftkin, the other clutched a duodecimo novel, which she
was reading with pointed concentration. Despite her infuriating twists of manners and mood,
Rossamünd was at first glad she had come along. But beyond the initial word she had been
ignoring him, for reasons he could not quite comprehend, spoiling the sweetness of her original
gallant gesture.
Has she come with me just to have someone to still pick on?
Rossamünd had reading matter of his own. Before the lentum-and-four had departed, he had
ventured to the Packet File to deliver his letter for Sebastipole and had been given another missive
in return. He still clutched it in his hand, forgotten in the haste of his embarkation. With him in
the cabin he had also brought his restocked salumanticum, his old traveling satchel with its knifein-sheath attached holding his peregrinate, and a parcel of wayfood. On the seat next to him was
his precious valise crammed with smalls and other necessaries for five days' travel. Anything
over that and he would just have to make do. The rest of what he owned — most of it issued by
the lamplighters when he first joined — had been stowed in an ox trunk and fixed to the roof of
the lentum along with Threnody's sizable collection of luggage, their fodicars and fusils.
In his pocket his buff-leather wallet was bulging full with traveling papers, reissued after the
ruin his old ones had become on his way to Winstermill. There was also a work docket already
bearing its first remarks: the period of his service as a prentice and the tasks undertaken, by
which was a "CS" for "Completed to Satisfaction"; under "Conduct" was the comment "Late for
prenticing period" and two small "i's" for his impositions — pots-and-pans with the now-vanished
Mother Snooks. It was all signed off by the Master-of-Clerks himself, now the MarshalSubrogat.

With these papers was a fair wad of folding notes and coin — his three months' wages as a
prentice and a large portion of the money Europe had given to him in High Vesting. As for a hat,
there had been no time to replace it, and so here he was venturing out with little more than the
bandage about his head.

The east wind whistled low on the Harrowmath, the usual odor of the long grass rank with the
rot of sodden vegetation. Mixing with the flat nonodor of his newly applied Exstinker, it became
an unpleasant half stink in Rossamünd's nostrils. He rubbed his nose with the back of his hand
and sighed his melancholy. An untimely departure, an uncertain way ahead, and Numps left in
the rough care of the lighters, yet Rossamünd was glad to be out of Winstermill and on the road
once more. He even entertained the hope he might see Europe on the way through.
He looked down at the letter and opened it, his hands slightly trembling.
It was dated the nineteenth of Pulvis, Solemnday — almost a week ago.

Rossamünd,
I have to tell ye of the profound and sorrowful news that on the night of the 5th of this month,
the marine society was burnt down and that Madam Opera did perish in the fire along with, to my
ever-living grief and shame, many children and Master Pinsum took, with valuables and papers burnt or
maybe stolen.
Verline and we other masters all survived. Perhaps we should not have lived with so many young
kilt. But survive we have and are seeking now to find berths for all the poor younkers made wastrel
once more.
That wretched utterworst Gosling set the spark, or so it appears. Barthomæus and I chased at
rumors of him a'watching the building many times afore the fire, but obviously turned up naught. The
splints say he has fled the city. He always was a yellow-gutted dastard and I should have ended him
long ago but for the restraint of conscience — and Verline, bless her.
With all that has got to be done for the tots it appears that Craumpalin and I shall be arriving to
ye later than expected, but can't be knowing when. Expect us maybe in two months.
With great respect and sorrow etc.

f.

Frans, Mstr, Ex-Gnr
I am sorry about being so long in scratching this down and sending it on to ye, but our labors have
not let me do so sooner. Thanks to ye for yer own letter dated 13th of Pulchris, it survived the fire
and we esteem it like treasure. Hold yer course, my boy, hold yer course — I know it is hard.
Remember I said once that paths need never stay fixed.
Also Craumpalin sends greeting: he says that he is most proud and very happy with the
usefulness of his bothersalts and tells ye (as do I) to keep wearing his Exstinker, if ye do not already.
Miss Verline is safe with her sister and her new niece and would send ye her best — as ye well
know — if she knew of this letter.
Well-fare-ye!
Rossamünd could not believe what was written. He read again. "...the night of the 5th of this
month..." That was the very night the horn-ed knickers had attacked Threnody and her sisters in
their carriage. Yet it was not until his third time through, slowly and painfully, that the full
impact of his old dormitory master's terrible news struck home. He turned his face away from
Threnody, hiding the collar of his pallmain, and wept as he had not wept in the longest time,
letting all the bleakness sob out. He wept for the dear dead children, for Master Pinsum, and even
for Madam Opera, who may not have been the kindest, but was by no means the worst; for the
grief caused to his beloved carers; for fury at Gosling's malice. The fury passed but the grief
remained, and Rossamünd lost himself in sad, wordless reveries, only vaguely heedful of the
progress of the carriage as it followed the Pettiwiggin along the Harrowmath.
They were passing through the Briarywood when he roused at last with thoughts of

Fransitart's arrival — and dear Craumpalin coming too. I must write to let them know I will not
be at Winstermill.
"What's wrong with you, lamp boy?" Threnody said, her voice raised only a little over the dull
rumble of the lentum. "Why do you cry?" She looked at Fransitart's letter. "Who is the
correspondence from?"
Rossamünd became suddenly very aware of the girl: aware of her proximity; of his unwanted
tears. He wiped at them quickly, sniffing impatiently. "My old dormitory master back in
Boschenberg..." he answered reluctantly. "He... he sends sad news."
"Sad news?" Threnody folded the duodecimo in her lap.
"My old home was burned down by an old foe," Rossamünd managed. "Madam Opera died
in the fire. She was the owner... and a... a mother, I suppose — in a strange way. She named me
— marked it in the book..."
"You're a better soul than me, Rossamünd."
"How?"
"You weep over the death of some wastrel proprietress, yet I can only wish my very own
mother might perish in a fire."
With a frown, Rossamünd returned to the window and broodily observed the passing scene.
He knew she was just trying to be kind. It did not help that she was not very good at it.
The post-lentum clopped between the twin keeps of Wellnigh House without hesitation, under
the Omphalon, and on through to the Roughmarch. With a feeling very much like going through
the Axles of Boschenberg, Rossamünd realized with equal parts dread and expectancy that he had
never been farther east than this point, that he was hurtling into what were, for him, unknown
lands.
A great-lamp at every bend, the Roughmarch Road twisted serpentlike through a valley
clotted with thorny plants of many kinds — sloe, briar, boxthorn and blackberry, its spiny runners
thickly stickling the verge. As with the wild grasses of the Harrowmath, fatigue parties were
regularly sent out from Wellnigh House and Tumblesloe Cot to pull and prune these plants, to
resist the threwd and deny monsters a hide from which to ambush. Yet either side of the way was
only partially hacked and cleared, and Rossamünd could still feel the haunting watchfulness here,
strong but strangely restrained. He stared at the high bald hills, dark and silent, and pulled up the
door sash to keep the threat outside, glad he did not have to work the lamps on this stretch.
If Threnody noticed the threwd, she did not show it. Indeed, she started to hum as she read
her book and paid Rossamünd and the rest of the world little heed.
They drove down out of the hills where a creek bubbled alongside the Wormway, spilling
over lichen-covered rocks, beneath twisted roots of writhen, leafless trees and south under the
road to make a bog at the foot of a short cliff. In as much time as it took to walk to Wellnigh
House from Winstermill, they were passing the walls of Tumblesloe Cot, not pausing there either.
The cothouse was built away from the highroad, right up against the cliffs that marched upon the
eastern flanks of the hills. Nothing could be seen of it but the stonework curtain walls and the
tops of a handful of chimneys. They were in foreign lands now — the great divide between the
Idlewild and the rest of the Empire had been crossed.
"Welcome to the Placidine," said Threnody. "Dovecote Bolt is next, at the junction with
another road; if you left the highroad and took this other pathway north it would lead you to my
old home, Herbroulesse."
Rossamünd looked at his peregrinate maps and saw the path she was talking of and her home
too, both important enough to be mentioned. He did not want to be, but he was actually
impressed. While it had stood, Madam Opera's marine society had never featured on any map he
knew. "What will your mother think of what you're doing," he asked, "going off to dangerous
cothouses?"
"She would lecture at me and I would disagree and we would start screaming and I would be
sent away somewhere with Dolours till Mother could bear to see me again."

"But what about the Emperor's Billion?" Rossamünd pressed.
"What about it?" Threnody snapped. "My mother has a larger mandate that that! Our clave's
Imperial Prerogative takes precedence over simple tokens."
"Imperial Prerogative?"
She gave him the by-now-familiar are-you-really-that-stupid? Look and said after a sigh, "It
allows us to do and be without the states troubling us. It is granted by the Emperor himself, and
not every clave has one." She finished with a proud sniff.
Before them the Conduit Vermis descended into a broad, shallow valley of scruffy pastures
hemmed to the north by a spur of bald hills and to the south by the rolling, pastured fells of the
Sparrow Downs. It was an unremarkable land. Rossamünd stared at the distant downs,
wondering if an urchin-lord truly was there watching and sending out its little sparrow-agents
from its leafy courts.
As the day grew longer, traffic began to pass going the other way. There were other postlentums with returning dispatches; barouques and landaulets, perhaps taking the well-to-do to
High Vesting or Brandenbrass; dyphrs dashing on errands; crofters commuting in curricles
between land and town. They also began to overtake slow-moving higglers with their trays of
fripperies, stooklings with their enormous bundles of sticks, laborers with their barrows, vendors
with their donkey carts; and always, whether in their direction or against, the ox drays and mule
carts of the merchants.
Another lamppost flicked past.
It was going to be along stretch to Wormstool.
"Ah," Threnody exclaimed, of a sudden, stirring Rossamünd from his sorrows, "I am sharpset — it must be time for middens."
The prentice craned a look out the window at the gunmetal sky. The sun hid behind the even
cover of clouds. He could not tell what hour it was — surely well past midday, yet his stomach
told the time more truly with a noisy poppling gurgle.
Threnody gave out a peculiar laughing bark. "Your gizzards think so too, it appears!" She
extracted a ditty bag from among her cushions and wraps, and shared her pong with dried-andsalted pork and a handful of millet, all washed down with a brown bottle of small beer.
Sick of the little varying diet of the Emperor's Service, Rossamünd took some food and ate
perfunctorily. Dull grief would not let him eat. However, once started, he found his appetite
returned and he supped heartily enough.
At the meal's end, Threnody took out a vial of sticky red Friscan's wead.
Rossamünd stared fixedly out of the window as she drank, not wanting to invite some petulant
overreaction.
With shadows growing long as the bulk of Tumblesloe Heap brought an early sunset, and
their rumps sore from too much sitting, they passed the lantern-watch of Dovecote Bolt wending
west, fodicars on shoulder, winding out the lonely lamps. The lampsmen hailed the lenterman,
but paid no heed to the passengers.
Gloaming finally gave up to darkness as they followed the glittering chain of new-lit lamps
and arrived at the cothouse itself. Dovecote Bolt was a high-house: whitewashed walls upon
stone foundations, with a fortified stairway to the only door at the very top of the structure, a high
wall extending behind it and a crowd of glowing lanterns at its front. It was built close by a
sludgy ford over the beginnings of a little stream known as the Mirthlbrook. Just before the ford
the post-lentum turned, went through a heavy gate and halted in the modest coach yard at the rear
of the cothouse.
The splasher boy opened the door, unfolded the step and said with a parched croak, "First
stop. And an overnight stay till tomorrow's post."
"As luggage was retrieved, lampsmen appeared from within bearing bright-limns to light their
way and dour expressions to greet them. The seven-strong garrison of this modest cothouse
seemed very tight, veterans with a long record of service together. However, they had little cheer

for new-promoted lampsmen, looking especially hard at Threnody as she mounted the stair and
entered the guardroom. It occupied the entirety of that floor, and with benches and trestles,
doubled as a common room for meals. The two young lamplighters were directed to the cramped
office of Dovecote Bolt's house-major, found in an attic-space loft of the steep roof.
Introducing himself as Major-of-House Wombwell, he spoke to them in a stiff yet welcoming
manner.
"Good evening to you, young... er— prentices!" he said, eyeing Threnody with a confounded
expression. His eyes became wider as he saw the small spoor upon her face. "Why have you
come to us from our glorious manse? Wellnigh is the usual range of your watch, is it not?"
"Ah," said Rossamünd, "we are on the way to our billet, sir."
"To your billet?" The house-major bridled. "Preposterous! Billeting Day is not for another
month."
"It has been called early by our dear new Marshal-Subrogat," Threnody explained with
affected amusement.
"Marshal-Subrogat?" the man quizzed her.
"Aye, sir," Rossamünd answered, getting a word in before Threnody for fear of some rash
statement from her. "The Master-of-Clerks has filled the place of the Lamplighter-Marshal."
"So it is true, then: the Lamplighter-Marshal is called away and that old fox Podious is top of
the heap. They even let lasses serve as lighters now, I see — troublesome times are here..."
The house-major asked them some further questions on minor details of Winstermill's running
and then they were dismissed. Threnody, much to the bemusement of the lighters, was granted
access to the kitchens to make her plaudamentum.
"Blighted Cathar's baskets as lighters — by my knotted bowels, who'd reckon it?" Rossamünd
could hear the house-major mutter as they left him.
"Would you need help with your treacle, Threnody?" Rossamünd offered as they were shown
down to their cots by the cot-warden: a surly, scabby-faced lighter —one of the permanent
house-watch, too old now to walk the highroad.
The girl paused, contriving to look bemused, amazed and annoyed all at once. "No thank
you, I will boil my own," she huffed, and left him to find the kitchen.
When she returned, they were served mains by the same surly cot-warden now acting as
kitchen hand. Incongruously the meal of boiled beef, onions and rice from the tiny kitchen tasted
better than anything made by Winstermill's vast cookery.
Left well alone on their cots by the lampsmen, Threnody read as Rossamünd contended with a
bout of the blackest sorrow.
When the lamp-watch arrived from Sallowstall, their thumping and calling reverberating
through the boards above, Threnody made trouble by asking for a privacy screen. Churlishly, the
old cot-warden and two of the lighters answered her demand, setting a dusty old screen for her
with much ungracious puffing and banging and stomping. Finished, the cot-warden left them,
muttering grumpily, "Anything else yer highness wants doing..." Behind the screen, by golden
lantern-light, Threnody did those mysterious things girls did before going abed. When she was
done, she pushed the screen away and got into her rough cot. She was in a voluminous white
nightdress, her hair gathered and hidden beneath a sacklike, ribbon-tied crinickle. Rossamünd
had never seen her in this way. She had been careful never to show herself after douse-lanterns
back at Winstermill. The nightclothes and hat made her look curiously vulnerable. He prepared
for sleep more publicly, his wounded head throbbing as it had not done for some days.
Sleep was hard-won that night. Rossamünd wrestled with his troubles as he lay in the cold
listening to Threnody's easy breathing.
*

*

*

*

*

Fed a hasty breakfast the next morning, they were allowed barely enough time for brewing

Threnody's treacle. A slap of reins and a shout, and the lentum went on, the weird song of unseen
birds echoing across the foggy valley their only farewell. Feeling empty and exhausted,
Rossamünd bid the Bolt a silent good-bye. Threnody slid over to Rossamünd's side of the
carriage and, pulling back the drape, stared at the low northward hills where Herbroulesse was
hidden, still dark despite the morning glow. "Till anon, Mother," she murmured, and kept her
vigil till they were well past the cothouse and the lesser road too.
The day's journey took them past dousing lampsmen returning to Sallowstall and on to that
place itself, the quality of the road improving from hard-packed clay and soil to flagstones. With
a blare of the horn, the post-lentum stopped at Sallowstall, a well-tended cot-rent with broad
grounds and thick walls.
The mail was passed over and horses changed. Over the ford, scattering half-tame ducks, and
out of the thicket of trees, the lentum resumed the journey.
As the afternoon wore on, the pastures on either side of the Wormway became neater, their
boundaries clearer, their furrows straighter, less weedy. Much of the land was a dark, fertile
brown. This was a very different land from the grayer soils of the crofts Rossamünd had known
about Boschenberg. Nearing Cothallow they saw peoneers levering at the road with iron-crows
while a grim-looking guard of haubardiers stood watch.
"Thrice-blighted baskets have taken to tearing up the highroad," Rossamünd heard someone
call to their driver as the post-lentum cautiously passed along. Flagstones had been torn up and
thrown aside, and a great-lamp bent over like a wind-broken sapling, its glass smashed, the
precious bloom torn into shreds and yellowing.
Nestled in a wooded valley, Cothallow was long and low, its thick granite façade perforated
with solid arches from the midst of which slit windows stared, closely barred and ready to be
employed as loopholes. Their stay was not much more than a shouted "Hallo!," an exchange of
mail and a hurried change of horses. The lenterman was clearly keen, with the advance of day, to
be at the next destination.
A sparrow alighted suddenly on the lowered door sash and, ruffling it wings, inspected first
Threnody then Rossamünd with keen deliberation. Threnody peered at the impertinent little bird
over the top of her duodecimo. It trilled at Rossamünd once and loudly, and then shot off with a
hum of speedy wings as the post-lentum jerked forward to resume its travels.
"I've never known such birds to be so persistent," Threnody exclaimed. "He looks just the
same as that one watching while we talked in the greens-garden by the manse."
Rossamünd leaned forward. "Perhaps the Duke of Sparrows is watching us? " he whispered.
"I can't think of why he would watch after us particularly," the girl answered him with a
frown.
"Maybe he's making sure you don't go witting the wrong bogle," Rossamünd muttered with a
weak grin, feeling anything by funny.
"Is there such a thing?" Threnody said seriously, looking at him sharply.
Rossamünd very much wanted to say “yes” but held his tongue.
The crowns of the hills about were thick with trees, but their flanks were broad with deep
green pastures, thin breaks of lithly myrtles. Here cattle lowed and chewed and drank from the
runnels that wore creases down the hillsides. Crows cawed to each other across the valley.
Their day's-end destination was the community of Makepeace, built amid sparse, elegant,
evergreen myrtles, right on the banks of the Mirthlbrook. It was the first significant settlement
upon the Conduit Vermis, a village sequestered behind a massive, foreboding wall. Rossamünd
could see the top bristling with sharp iron studs and shards of broken crockery, which seemed to
make a lie of the Makepeace's friendly name. Crowds of chimneys stretched well above the
beetling fortifications, each one drizzling steamy smoke into the still, damp air, showing a
promise of a warm hearth and even warmer food. Rossamünd imagined every home filled with
humble families — father, mother, son, daughter — living quietly useful lives.
Upon either side of the gate were two doughty bastion-towers, both showing the muzzle of a

great-gun through enlarged loopholes. Situated immediately by the northern tower, the cothouse
of Makepeace Stile merged its foundations with those of the wall. A high fastness much like
Dovecote Bolt yet greatly enlarged — maybe five or six stories — the Stile was near as tall as the
chimney stacks of Makepeace and must have dominated the view of the west from within the
village.
The post-lentum eased into a siding between the cot-house and the highroad, its arrival
coincident with the departure of the lamp-watch.
Alighting from the carriage, Rossamünd heard a cry sound from down the gloomy road. "The
hedgeman comes! Be a-ready to make your orders, the hedgeman comes!" It was uttered by a
portly figure pulling his test-barrow and strolling toward the town from the same direction the
lentum had just come, as if there was no threat from monsters.
A hedgeman! Rossamünd's attention pricked. These were wandering folk, part skold,
dispensurist and ossatomist who cured chills and set bones (for a fee) where other habilists would
not venture. He had not noticed them passing the fellow earlier, though they must have.
"The hedgeman is here! Come a-make your orders, the hedgeman is here!" came the cry
again, and this time Rossamünd recognized the crier.
Mister Critchitichiello! Mister Critchitichiello, who made his living hawking his skills to all
and any along the Wormway. When he had first arrived at Winstermill, Rossamünd found it
much easier to ask the kindly hedgeman to make Craumpalin's Exstinker than go to Messrs.
Volitus or Obbolute, the manse's own script-grinders. Now, with the current batch near its end,
and more required to last him at his new billeting, Rossamünd hurried over to the man through
traffic and the rain.
In the manse the hedgeman was a popular fellow. Rossamünd had to wait his turn while the
small crowd of brother-lighters ordered eagerly. Mostly they came for love-pomades made to
secure the affections of Jane Public and the other dolly-mops — the maids and professional girls
living in the towns about — or find a cure for the various aches and grumbles your average
lampsman seemed always to possess. Out here, however, two days east of Winstermill,
Rossamünd was the only customer.
"Well ‘ello there, young a-fellow." Critchitichiello greeted Rossamünd in his strange
Sevillian accent, grinning at him from beneath the wide brim of his round hat. "I a-remember you
from the fortress. Yes? Back then you wore a hat and not a bandage."
The prentice nodded cheerily.
"Hallo, Mister Critchitichiello. Triple the quantity of my Exstinker, please. I have the list for
it if you need to remember its parts."
Critchitichiello smiled. "No — no, I remember. Old Critchitichiello never forgets such
clever mixings." He tapped his pock-scarred brow knowingly. "I'll have it ready for you in a
puff, Rossamündo. You see! I even remember your name though we meet but once."
Rossamünd followed the hedgeman as he set his test-barrow down under the eave of a small
stall built against the eastern wall. A remarkable little black-iron chimney poked out and up from
the back, puffing clean little puffs of smoke. Critchitichiello unlatched and unfolded his barrow,
the lid swinging up to provide a roof from the rain.
Master Craumpalin would want to see this! Rossamünd thought sadly of the charcoal ruin
that Master Craumpalin's own marvelous test had become. He gripped the list of parts made by
the dispensurist's own hand as if it were a precious jewel. He had read the recipe many times and
knew it well: mabrigond, wine-of-Sellry, nihillis, dust-of-carum, benthamyn. As he observed the
testing — as making a script is called — Rossamünd habitually ran through the steps in his mind.
Start with five parts — no! Fifteen parts wine-of-Sellry in a porcelain beaker over gentle heat.
A familiar savory smell wafted, like fine vegetable soup, as the liquid began to simmer.
Add one — ah, three parts nihillis and...
Pumping at an ingenious little foot bellows connected to the test-barrow, the hedgeman

looked up from his work, and with a frown of friendly concern said, "You know, Rossamündo, I
have a-made many nullodors along these many roads, but with this a-one here I cannot figure how
it might a-do its job." Critchitichiello shrugged, thick-gloved hands raised palms-to-the-sky.
Rossamünd blinked. The hedgeman was such a kindly fellow he did not want to gainsay him.
Yet he knew Master Craumpalin would never give him something that was crank. To question
his old dispensurist's scripts was unthinkable.
"It has done what I suppose it was meant to do," he offered guardedly. "I have no complaint."
Add the benthamyn.
"And good that is!" Critchitichiello kept smiling. "Yet I tell you. Up till a-now its parts are
all just as they ought — a simple base for a nullodor, but put a-this in" — and in went the tiny
benthamyn pellets, six parts, just in time — "and suddenly it's like a-no nullodor I've ever heard
made. It might foil some noses, but not a nicker's sniffing."
Rossamünd nodded patiently. He had no answer for the hedgeman. Instead he watched in
silence as the mabrigond and dust-of-carum were added in right and timely proportion.
"Don't a-mind me, Rossamündo, my fine a-fellow," the hedgeman said perceptively. "Just a
curious old noddy am I... I'm a-sure this no-stinker answers for what you are a-wanting it for."
Rossamünd certainly hoped it was so.
Critchitichiello poured the deep blue liquid into a fine new bottle and Rossamünd reached for
his wallet.
Taking payment, the hedgeman looked beyond him with twinkling eye. "That sweet lass has
been a-watching you for a little while," he said mildly. "Is she your sweetheart?"
Sweetheart? Rossamünd looked around and saw Threnody standing beneath a lantern already
lit against the dim afternoon. She was leaning against it and looking his way very, very intently.
"Oh, that — er... She isn't my sweetheart, Mister Critchitichiello," he said emphatically.
"Ah. Too a-bad for thee. Though..." Critchitichiello said with a flourish of a bow, a
conspiratorial whisper and a glance at Threnody, "...if you's a-needing an amorpoti — a lover's
brew — just remember your a-friend, Critchitichiello."
With a blush and a garbled farewell Rossamünd quit the awkward scene.
Threnody pulled a cryptic face as he approached. "What have you had that ledgermain
making?"
"Mister Critchitichiello is no ledgermain," Rossamünd came back, still tetchy. "He's the
genuine article, a true dispenser."
"Ledgermains. Imperial fumomath. However you like it, lamp boy," she insisted. "That does
not answer my question, does it? What did the man make you?"
"It's a... a nullodor. For my salumanticum."
Threnody stoked at her lips. "A nullodor! A waste of good parts. What do you need a
nullodor for?"
What has everyone got against them? First Critchitichiello, now Threnody. Rossamünd did
not care to quibble. Craumpalin had given it to him and told him to wear it, and that was good
enough.
In silence they entered Makepeace Stile together.
As douse-lanterns approached and while Threnody polished her teeth with expensive
dentifrices, Rossamünd decided it was time to write his own letter back to Fransitart.

Dormitory Master Fransitart
By the care of Lady Praeline
Versierdholte
Halt-by-Wall
Boschenberg City
Hergoatenbosch

4th of Heimio, HIR 1601
Dearest Master Fransitart,
I have got your letter and read its most terrible and sad news. I wept for you
all, especially the little ones and Master P and the poor Madam, but am so glad to
know that you and Miss Verline and Master Craumpalin (his poor dispensary!)
still live. Though you might feel that you should not have survived the fire, it is too
sweet a consolation for me that you survived to share your regret. And though you
have all taught me to return evil with good, I cannot help but wish foul ends for
that dastard Gosling. I can hear you scolding me in my head even as I write this.
What is to become of you all now?
The other reason I write to you is to tell you that I have been sent early to my
first billet, a place called Wormstool, far east along His Most Serene Highness'
Highroad, the Conduit Vermis — almost the last place before the blighted Ichormeer.
Can you believe it that I shall be so close to such a terrible place? Though it is a
long way out from Winstermill, I shall probably be already established there by the
time you get this. When you do travel, please come to me there — I am sorry it is so
far away.
I am delighted that Master Craumpalin might be with you when you see me,
though I most solemnly wish it was under better reasons.
Please give my most loving regards to all I care for. Tell Miss Verline I am
safe. Tell Master Craumpalin I still wear his Exstinker. A hedgeman made me
some more today, and he was baffled as to how it worked. He seemed good at his
trade but perhaps not as good as our own dispensurist.
It is wonderful to hear that your health has improved with Master
Craumpalin's help — may you stay in fine fettle always, from your old charge,
and with love,

Rmnd

Rossamünd Bookchild
Lampsman 3rd Class
Makepeace Stile
Makepeace
The Idlewild
I do not wish to alarm you, but some nights ago I fought with a rever-man in the
cellars of Winstermill Manse. This is the second I have ever met and they are
broken and disgusting things that only need to be destroyed. I worry for a friend
I left behind. His name is Mister Numps, a retired seltzerman. Please look in on
him if you pass through the manse.
Tell Miss Verline that I love her and her new niece very much.
Of Discipline and Limb!

21
The Brisking Cat
knavery offices where a person can go to hire a teratologist or three or as many as are needed. Such establishments
gain their from the term “knave,” that is, any person who sells services to any paying client, as opposed to a spurn,
who serves a retaining lord or master. When entering a region for the first time, a teratologist may register at the
local knavery to make it known that he or she is about and going on the roll offering services. In doing this monsterhunters are agreeing not to shop their skills through other neighboring knaveries or their own advertisement, thus
denying the knavery its commission. The knaving-clerk will take a request from a customer and offer a selection of
monster-hunters to solve the dilemma. Once the teratologist has been selected, he or she is approached with an Offer
of Work, which may be accepted or rejected. Work is more steady for teratologists who use the knaving system,
though they usually make less money for service rendered.

T

he next day, thick with rain, was an early start again. Leaving his letter with the PostMaster at Makepeace Stile, Rossamünd followed Threnody as she dashed to the post-lentum
waiting in the foreyard of the cothouse. Back and shoulders becoming rapidly sopped, the young
lighter did his best to shield his bandaged crown with his satchel.
Traveling certificates and nativity patents approved by the officious gatemen, they passed
through Makepeace to continue. Rossamünd saw little of the town though the obscuring
downpour, only narrow buildings with glowing, narrow windows, water spouting from the edge
of every horizontal surface on to even narrower streets. A soot-grubby child no more than ten
scurried from eave to eave past the slow-going lentum — a char-boy, perhaps from Gathercoal,
come to serve an errand in this cleaner town. Wondering what hard labors were this small lad's
lot, Rossamünd caught his eye and they traded mournful glances.
Out the other side of Makepeace the road broadened and they discovered the lamps ahead had
been left to shine on in the storm-dark morning. This was most certainly not good traveling
weather, and the lenterman kept the pace slow for fear of skidding off the road.
The scene continued cozily pastoral: fortified farmsteads glimpsed at the end of private, treelined drives nestled among thickets of domesticated trees and were surrounded with fastidiously
tended fields and drystone walls.
Every six lamps or so were low concrete-and-stone strongworks, squat boxes with loopholes
and steps that went into the earth down to three-quarter-buried iron-bound doors. Rossamünd had
never seen the like, and no one at Winstermill had ever talked of such things.
The sun was one quarter along its meridian when they met a convoy of large covered drays
trundling the opposite way in a long line, every one under the guard of a skold or scourge. Drawn
by great trains of flanchardt-covered oxen, each bore hundredweights of finest-grade charcoal
from Gathercoal, likely intended for Winstermill, High Vesting and the settlements of the
southwest. It took the long end of fifteen minutes to pass the last dray.
They ate middens with stores granted from Makepeace Stile's pantry (a rind of hard, rivercaught fish) and Threnody went back to reading. Taking pointed notice of the book, Rossamünd
read the small white letters printed on its burgundy cover — The High and Illustrious Ladies of
the Magna Suthës.
"What is that book about?" he asked absently.
The girl made as if to continue reading but, after a pause, she marked her place, closed her
book, laid it primly on her lap, cleared her throat and looked up. "It is about the adventures of
city women and their flash swells."
"Flash swells?"
She looked owlishly at his for a moment. "The rich young men who live such fun and easy
lives in the cities."

"Oh, you mean dandidawdlers." Rossamünd thought of the frilly, fussy fellows he had
observed making a nuisance on the streets of Boschenberg. "Is it interesting?"
"I think so, yes, though Mother doesn't like books such as these."
"Why not?"
"She says they're full of vile gossip and innuendo and she says they grossly exaggerate the
successes of the protagonists without making enough of the consequences of their foolishness."
"You sound like you've had this said to you often." Rossamünd gave a mild grin.
"I could recite to you all of Mother's words better than the In Columba Alat," she returned
wryly.
"The In Columna what-tat?"
"In Columba Alat," Threnody explained, with uncharacteristic patience. "‘The Wings of The
Dove’ — it's our cantus, the rule we live — I mean the Right — lives by."
"How does it go?"
"I don't know." Threnody grinned. "I've forgotten it."
"But I thought you just said you knew it well," Rossamünd returned a little dumbly.
Threnody sighed long-sufferingly. "I do." She picked up the duodecimo and opened it again.
"I was just making a jest," she said, and went back to reading.
"Oh." Rossamünd frowned. "Sorry."
Soon after, the horses were watered at the cothouse of Sparrowstall. Blackened spikes ran in
rows along every ridge-cap and gable, set there to prevent weary birds or adventurous nickers
from taking roost.
A little over two hours further and they arrived at Hinkerseigh, much larger than Makepeace,
with thicker walls and higher, more numerous bastions all filled with well-tended great-guns. It
was a growing town — nearly a city, its people squeezed for room; some of the less well-heeled
had been forced to build beyond the safety of the town's stony curtain. The Mirthlstram flowed
right into the place under the wall to drive many waterwheels of industry within as it passed
through. As it was a client-city belonging to the Imperial state of Maubergonne, Hinkerseigh's
taciturn gatemen were dressed in harness of orot and gules — orange and deep red. They
scrutinized Rossamünd and Threnody's documents cursorily and waved the lentum through.
The carriage crawled down the narrow main street, moving little faster in the midst of the
cram of traffic than a town-and-country gent out on a lazy Domesday ramble. At a coach-host,
the Draint Fyfer, the lentermen stopped to change teams. The broad, covered yard was thronged
with public coaches and private carriages; horns hooting, sergeant-yardsmen bawling, underyardsmen obeying, porters and box-boys and mercers scurrying. Exiting the lentum first,
Threnody dashed off into the rain with little more than an "I'll be back!" and was gone before
Rossamünd could call after or follow. With a shrug he took a midday meal and waited alone.
The warm commons of the coach-host was as impossibly crowded as the yard without, apress with merchants' wives and farmstead ladies, nannies and their bantling charges screeching
for attention; slightly damp higglers and shysters en route to more spendthrifty places; and offduty pediteers; all waiting for a break in the weather. It was only twenty minutes or so before
Rossamünd was called for by the hollering splasher boy to board the po’lent, yet it took Threnody
more than an hour to return. She appeared suddenly by the carriage door, grinning broadly and
quickly handing an oblong oilskin-covered something to the splasher boy.
"We'll still be in a tight bit o‘ hurry to make it to the next cot in time!" the driver said, louring
down at her from his high seat as she climbed aboard. "So I recommend ye hang on ter
something." He proved good to his promise, for no sooner had Threnody settled into her nest of
furs than the lentum surged to motion.
"What were you doing? Rossamünd shouted above the noise of transit. "We've been waiting
for a while..."
Threnody looked at him unrepentantly. "I always like to try a little shopping when I can."
Rain began falling so hard its rattling drum on the carriage roof made conversation

impossible. Threnody raised the sash on her side to keep its splashings out, yet Rossamünd left
his down to see what passed and tolerated the wet. As Hinkerseigh disappeared in the fog of the
deluge, the highroad narrowed. The lenterman whipped up the new horse-team's rate and kept the
poor beasts at a dangerous, transom-shattering speed for several miles, slowing only occasionally
to rest them. The post-lentum dashed right past Howlbolt, not even slowing down for courtesy,
noisily scattering a coven of ravens that had settled before the cothouse.
The valley became deeper, the Mirthlbrook drawing close by the Wormway again, broader
now, its banks choked with willow, swamp oak and hawthorn, its waters rushing over and through
sharp rocks and keeping pace with the lentum. The stream's opposite bank was steep, almost
clifflike, tangled with dark young woods.
"That's the Owlgrave," Threnody shouted above the roar of the rain and the road. "It's said
that monsters like to go there to die when they are mortal-hurt or sick of the world."
Rossamünd stared at the choked rise imagining he could see some languishing nicker up
among the rocks and trees. He had always thought monsters lived on and on till someone slew
them, and the idea of them pining away was odd, disturbing. So that is where they end, he
pondered, but where do they begin? His reading had informed him of many theories. Some
scholars said monsters grew on trees, others that they grew “buds” on themselves, which dropped
to the ground and grew into other monsters. The worst way was congress between everyman and
ünterman, which was said to spawn some wicked half-human abomination, the ultimate excess of
outramour. Implicit in the accusation of sedorner was the suspicion of such a union. Most
habilists said such a thing was impossible, but common folks still believed it, and that was
enough.
Out the other side of the lentum Rossamünd saw the flicker of a lighted lamp, then another.
Regardless of pelting rain and threatening lands, the lantern-watch of Bitterbolt, the next
cothouse, had faithfully would out the lamps.
The Wormway went down and over a large stone-arch bridge with lit lanterns upon either
abutment that passed over the broad stream of the Bittermere. Before this bridge was a
foreboding collection of buildings, each four or five stories of dressed stone, baked bricks, mortar
and lead shingles. It was a mighty rectangular accretion, its roofs thorny with high chimneys.
There was no encircling walls; the lowest floors were absent of any openings — not even a single
door, and the few second-story windows were heavily barred. Even the undersides of the sills of
higher windows and the gutters were garlanded with thorny wire. The footings of the entire pile
were assiduously smeared with a slippery-looking black substance, a repellent no doubt. This
was a place that never intended a monster to ever gain a foothold. The winds and the rain had
blown themselves out. In the stillness, the comfort of sweet wood-smoke and the savory promise
of that evening's prandial preparations wafted down to them from the place.
"The wayhouse of the Brisking Cat, good folks," the sidearmsman called helpfully from his
perch.
Upon the other side of the highroad was a low brick building with no sidelights or transoms or
even a casement. Its strong doors were half buried into the chalky ground and a siding lane with
sturdy walls upon either side branched off and went down to them. At the top of the lane stood a
filigree lantern-post. Fixed to this was a badly stained signboard upon which was painted a lion,
its claws reaching.
The lentum descended the lane and went through ironwood gates opened for it at the end.
Through the gates and within the low building was a great stablery for horse and carriage, much
of it tunneling back into the hillock itself. The reek of hay and hoof-trodden pats made the air
foul.
Grinning, ear to ear, the splasher boy opened the door for them with a touch to the brim of his
tall stovepipe hat. "We've done all right to get you here afore the daisy hay was done," he said
excitedly.

"Excuse me?" Threnody scowled. "The what was done?"
The splasher boy looked at her as if she were Jack Simple. "The daisy hay..." He grinned at
Rossamünd as if he knew, but Rossamünd had not heard the term either. "It's the right time of
day for travel! Only lighters and fools go out after sundown — oh..." The splasher boy went
bright red as he realized who he was talking to and quickly found other things to do.
"I see," said Threnody.
As Rossamünd and Threnody alighted, another person was arriving on foot, let in by the small
sally port fixed in the heavy ironwood gate. The last gasp of a gust blew through the door,
bringing with it a sweetly salty and familiar scent.
"Did you get your hob-gnasher, Madam Rose? One of the gaters asked.
"That I did, Master File," the newly arrived wayfared declared briskly, and lifted a large
leather satchel bulging with something lumpy and vaguely head-shaped. "And a might of trouble
it gave me too."
It was Europe!
The Branden Rose was wearing her usual deep red fighting garb, and was muffled against the
cold with the spangled-fur pollern. Three heavy-harnessed gaters attending bowed in quiet
deference.
Threnody made to follow a porter and continue on through to the wayhouse, but stopped
when she realized Rossamünd was just lingering and staring.
Eventually Europe turned, with narrowed eyes that went wide — just for a moment — then
knowing. She swaggered over, an eyebrow cocked. "Well hello again, little man," the fulgar said
softly as she approached. "Have they finally let you out of Winstermill?"
"Hello, Miss Europe," Rossamünd greeted cheerfully. "We're on our way to our new billet."
Smiling at her, he saw that the fulgar's eyes were badly bloodshot, an almost complete and
ghastly red.
"Where is that?" Europe smiled tightly in return.
"Wormstool — what's happened to your eyes, miss? They're all red like a falseman's."
The woman's brow furrowed. "It comes from a long day arcing. And what have you done to
your head, little man? All bandage and no hat!"
"I lost it in a fight."

The fulgar raised an amused eyebrow. "In a fight, was it? I cannot leave you for a moment.
Well, at least you did not lose my gift," she said, looking at his fine scarf. She turned a cool gaze
to Threnody. "I see you have brought the august's daughter with you."
"I..." was yet forming in Rossamünd's mouth when Threnody interjected.
"You're the Branden Rose, aren't you?" she asked, with a look of profound, barely contained
excitement. Rossamünd had never seen her look quite so enthusiastic — it was odd.
"My name precedes me, I see," said Europe, a subtle smirk fluttering at the corner of lip and
eye.
"And you really do know him? " Threnody glanced at Rossamünd.
"Aye—" he began.
"Indeed!" Europe replied civilly. "We are old wayfaring chums, are we not, little man? WE
have been on many an adventure already."
"I am Lady Herbroulesse," the girl lighter began, barely waiting for an answer, "daughter of
the Lady Vey, August of the Right of the Pacific Dove," finishing with affected gravity as she
tried not to betray her eagerness.
A hint of disdain fluttered across Europe's face. "I heard rumor that the Marchioness Vey had
issue by some clandestine means, and here breathes the proof. Might I say you are dressed
peculiar for a calendar?"
Threnody looked down at her gorgeous, if slightly travel-ruffled clothes. "Oh, I'm not a
calendar anymore. I'm a full lamplighter now."
Europe's smile was patient, polite. "Good for you, my dear. So now I know something of
you and you already know something of me and we are all met. How lovely." Europe did not
look as if she thought it lovely at all, but rather boring. "Come! Time for easy chairs and warm
meals."
They were let through a heavy door by a broad-set gater with thick mustachios wearing a
black-felt liripipium, its long peak almost trailing in the straw-rubbish. As Europe and her two
guests approached, he opened the way and took the along an arched, brick-lined tunnel that must
have been burrowed right under the Wormway. At the other side their guide hammered upon
another door, crying, "Ad apertum! The Branden Rose and two companions," to those beyond.
They were admitted through a block-room and climbed slate steps to a broad wood-paneled
vestibule of the wayhouse proper.
Footmen in plush asked for their names, took baggage and stowed weapons in an armorystand to be retrieved on call. This was a very fine establishment indeed. Europe handed over the
satchel. "Put it in the cold room for me: I will be requiring it tomorrow to claim my prize."
A horse-faced woman clad in a style of dress that Rossamünd had never seen before, made of
heavy velvet with broad hanging sleeves and a pretty white palisade cap, rustled over to greet
them. She paid studied respect to Europe and politely introduced herself to the two young
lamplighters as the enrica d'ama. "‘Allo, young travelers," she said in a sweet voice and a delicate
southern accent, "I am Madam Oubliette, the proud owner of this fine ‘ouse. If you are seeking
any service you must call on me or my man Parleferte." She indicated a gaunt, harassed-looking
steward. "Any time of sunup or moon-down. Now please, ‘ave your ease in the Saloon."
A footman announced them over the moderate hubbub of other conversation. "Her Grace, the
Branden Rose, Europa of Fortrevault, Duchess-in-waiting of Naimes; the Lady Threnody of
Herbroulesse and a guest!" was the ringing cry, to which few of their fellow patrons paid any
attention.
"Yes, yes," Europe huffed. "Get on and show us our place, man!"
"How do you feel, guest, on being just a guest?" Threnody gibed at Rossamünd quietly.
"Shall I call you guest from now onward?"
Rossamünd did not acknowledge her.
Before him was a great hexagonal space with balconies, boxes and claustral-booths rising on
every side for three whole floors — the privatrium, each reached by a confusion of stairs and

walks. The radiating beams of the lofty ceiling were carved with forms of intertwined cats in
various attitudes of hunt or play. Every beam met in the middle and from this zenith hung a
collection of great-lamps gathered together like some bizarred chandelier. Beneath this, in the
middle of the space surrounded by the privatrium, was a raised oval stage hemmed in by a
semicircular tapery-counter at one end where drinks were being pulled or poured. About the
tapery were tables and chairs and people sitting at them in a variety of attitudes: animated,
upright, slouched, slumped, even leaning dangerously. Rossamünd was so amazed by it all he
stumbled on his own feet more than once before the three were settled in a second-story claustra
— a somewhat private stall of leather high-backed benches around a square table.
"The Brisking Cat," Europe declared grandly as they sat. "Wayhouse, knavery and my
current abode."
The Saloon was wall to wall with pugnators and their hangers-on, coming, going and ordering
about the staff with high-handed carelessness. Rossamünd watched the gallimaufry of
teratologists in wide-eyed wonder. Indiscriminate monster-killers written about in public print or
gossiped about in civic rumor, a fabulous collection like the pages of a pamphlet come to life.
Seeing his fascination, Europe began to name some of them.
"There are the Boanergës — the ‘Sons of Thunder,’" she explained, watching three grimlooking fellows huddled together in grim conversation, periodically glancing suspiciously over
their shoulders. "A competent band, each one a fellow astapecrith, though none too bright."
"And that is the Knave of Diamonds," said Threnody, keen to show her worldliness.
Rossamünd looked and saw a large man pass below. He wore a “crown” of tall spiked reeds upon
his head, upon his body a heavy-gaulded smock of lambrequin of dirty white with its single, large
red diamond on the front; and upon his fierce face a large deep blue diamond spoor.
A solitary calendar from a different clave than Threnody's walked across the Saloon floor and
took a booth across the other side. She was wearing a bossick of prüs and sable checks and her
face was striped like that of a grazing animal from far beyond the Marrow. She wore a
dandicomb of long, elegant horns that her claustra was fortunately high enough to contain.
Threnody watched her closely. "She need not have come," the girl huffed with the strains of
territorial jealousy. "The Right has these troubles in hand."
"Who is she?" Rossamünd said so softly he barely spoke at all.
"She's a caladine," Europe answered.
"Entering our diet without a by-your-leave," the girl lighter added icily. "I doubt she has
presented herself to Mother. Saphine is her name. She is from the Maids of Malady."
"Truly?" said Europe. "Your surgeon had perhaps best watch himself."
"Miss Europe?"
"I have the understanding that these Maids of Malady have allied themselves with the
Soratchë. Maybe they lend their help to the Soratchë, and Saphine is coming to investigate that
Swill fellow. Wheels inside wheels, and all that."
Rossamünd hoped this was true. He stared at the calendar until she felt the scrutiny and
turned to look at him. Flushing, the young lighter looked away quickly and found a teratologist
he knew by sight. He had seen etchings of her in the more sensational pamphlets. Epitomë Bile
was her name, a woman written of as a myth: lupine and pitiliess and astoundingly daring. Yet
here she was, a woman as real as his own hand, all in glossy black soe, white-faced with staring,
black-rimmed eyes and oddly cropped black hair.
Europe showed clear distaste. "Cruel and heartless," she warned. "Stay well clear of her."
Aye, Rossamünd wondered, but has she ever sparked a child in the head?
Epitomë Bile looked up, caught Europe's cold eye and returned it, giving a slow, taunting
curtsy. A wicked smile flitted across the strange woman's mien. The two teratological women
kept each other fixed with stares of mutual loathing, until Epitomë Bile walked out of the
common room, sly, malevolent amusement never leaving her face.
Rossamünd felt a shiver of dismay. He hoped never to cross her path more closely.

Europe clucked her tongue quietly and looked elsewhere. "There you have the Three Brave
Brothers," she said, pointing with her chin to a group of men below them (just returned perhaps
from the course), turning her guest's attention to other things. "They actually number four, are not
related to each other... and are not particularly brave, either." Rossamünd, who had read of these
Brave Brothers, was stunned to see walking before him their infamous scourge, Sourdoor, in his
swathes of black lour — proofed velvet.
"And so my kind gather, looking for violence." Europe sighed. "Collecting together like
crows about a corpse."
All the great folk, and the lesser known too, strutted the common room and the privatrium,
eyeing one another, ego against ego, and generally getting in the way of the wayhouse's even
routine.
"The Maid Constant." The fulgar indicated a with an arrow-spoor pointing up form each
brow and brilliant hued blue hair. "She too must needs wear a wig, as you do, my dear, but her
hair was green last week and blue for this."
Threnody went beetroot blush and sat up. "No wig for me, madam," she said quickly,
glowering nervously at Europe.
"Not yet, anyway," Rossamünd put in, trying to be helpful.
She glared at him.
"By-the-by," said Europe, unconcerned.
The fulgar rattled off many more names, of so many teratologists that Rossamünd could not
keep track, and he simply listened to the smooth sound of her voice. His wonder became a little
numbed, and he sat a little easier in the comfortable booth. The young lampsman felt the strains
of the road ease out into the soft seating, and he became quickly acquainted with just how tired he
was. Food was ordered — from the Best Cuts, of course, Rossamünd trying "Starlings in ViandRoyal Sauce" — and an awkwardness persisted while they waited for it to arrive, wetting their
thirst with the sourest rich-red wine Rossamünd had ever been served. With the wine came a
tankard of steaming Cathar's Treacle for Europe.
"It's tessellated in bulk in the kitchens, by a tandem of skolds of faultless reputation," she
explained, "at a hefty charge, of course. You may want some yourself, my dear." She nodded
gravely at Threnody.
"No thank you, Duchess," Threnody returned, still sitting stiff-backed, hands clasped on the
table before her. "I have always been taught that one does best to make one's own
plaudamentum."
The fulgar became suddenly expressionless.
"Indeed," she said, after a long, discomfiting moment, "one would prefer to have it made
perpetually be the same trusted hands at a day's two ends, but what one wants and what one gets
are rarely the same. The one I once had confidence in is... no longer available — and another
unwilling." She peered at Rossamünd.
He tapped purposefully at the tabletop, not meeting either gaze. He had vowed to serve the
lamplighters and the Emperor, yet as the troubles of the lamplighters increased, so did the appeal
of being the Branden Rose's factotum. If only she was more careful about which bogles to kill.
Providentially, mains arrived and all talk ceased for a time as, in the rust glow of red-, orangeand yellow-glassed lanterns, they ate in hungry silence.
Music swelled from the oval stage below them: sweet chamber sounds of fiddle, violoncello
and sourdine, and adding mellifluously to it a soaring female voice. Rossamünd felt he had heard
this singing somewhere before and, looking down to the stage, saw a quartet of scratch-bobbed,
liveried musicians and, in a halo of light, Hero, the chanteuse of Clunes. Dressed in a smokegreen chiffon dress with broad, gathered skirts, black rumples at the elbows, her hair piled and
rolled and festooned with flowers of similar color to the chiffon, she was the very same songstress
he had watched in raptures at the Harefoot Dig. Yet here she was now, projecting sonorous verse

all about the great room, arms reaching out imploringly. Rossamünd forgot his food and listened,
heedless of time's passing, arm on balustrade, cheek resting on arm, his eyes just a little doelike.
Threnody affected to be unimpressed. "It is adequate, I suppose," she said in the applause
between songs, "if you like those Lentine styles."
Rossamünd decided he liked the Lentine style very well and could not understand Threnody's
remark.
Her own meal finished, Europe lounged on the comfortable bench and picked at a sludgy,
creamy-colored delicacy known simply as cheesecake, soaked in syrup of peach-blossoms. With
it came sillabub — a curdled concoction of milk and vinegar. She let Rossamünd try a little, and
he came away from the taste smacking his lips in disgust. She did not, however, offer any to
Threnody, who had become more and more sullen and sour-faced as the night deepened and did
not show any care.
Washing out the vile aftertaste with the bitter small wine, Rossamünd asked solemnly, "Miss
Europe, wheat do you know of Wormstool?"
"It is remote and dangerous and no place for new-weaned lamplighting lads and lasses."
Europe scowled. "What can your masters be thinking, sending you out there?"
"Oh, I was not sent," Threnody said piously. "I asked to go. Those with greater capacities
have to wait on those who do not. It's how I have been taught and..." She looked at her fellow
traveler. "Rossamünd will need the help — as you yourself probably well know."
"Oh?" Europe turned a piercing gaze on the girl. "And who will look out for you, my dear?"
"Rossamünd," the girl returned simply. "We lighters stick together, just like calendars."
The fulgar laughed unexpectedly. "Aren't you an adorable little upstart?" she purred.
Chin lifting then dropping, Threnody clearly did not know whether to be offended or pleased.
She looked out into the Saloon at nothing in particular.
"Now tell me, young Rossamünd," Europe demanded, "what were you fighting that cost you
yet another hat?"
"It was a rever-man, miss," the young lighter said simply.
Europe went wide-eyed. There was a pause, incredulity hovering at its fringes. "Truly?" she
said eventually. "How did you manage to get tangled up with one of those? More to the point,
how did you survive it?"
"I found it deep in the cellars of Winstermill the very next night after you left."
"Ah! You're playing a leg-pull on me, little man." The fulgar started smiling knowingly.
"Your old home is far too tough to crack for some rotten-headed thing like a rever-man. That old
Marshal of your must be sadly slipping if he let one of those wretches in."
Rossamünd gall twisted at this. "I don't think he is slipping, Miss Europe, but still, sure as I
sit here, it was a gudgeon I wrestled right down in the bottom of the fortress." He went on to tell
the whole tale, elaborating especially on the moment when he jammed the loomblaze into the
rever-man's gnashing maw. That moment was powerfully satisfying to recall. "It was somewhere
in that fight I lost my hat," he concluded.
"Aren't you the one for getting yourself into fixes not of your own making?" Europe's
knowing gaze had not slipped for the length of his tale. "You are still the strangest, bravest, little
man. Throwing a gudgeon about and blasting it to char is beyond even some of my ilk. You're
not as helpless as you seem." She looked at Threnody.
"Maybe." Rossamünd tried not to look too pleased. "It was gangling and poorly made, with
too-long arms and hairy, piggy ears, just like those" — he pointed to a sizzling porker's head that
was being carried past at that very moment by a struggling maid. — "and no great feat to best."
"The Lamplighter-Marshal said it was a mighty deed," Threnody stated proudly in a strange
change of tack.
"I should think he would," the fulgar said, taking a sip of wine. "You did him a great service,
Rossamünd."

"Yet it still did not stop the man receiving a sis edisserum from the Considine," the young
lampsman said sadly.
"Truly?" Europe murmured. "You don't hear of that happening every diem. Your Marshal
must certainly have gone awry then."
Rossamünd did not hear her. His thoughts had pounced on his own words, hairy, piggy ears.
The gudgeon had large, furry, leaf-shaped ears, pig's ears, like those on the meal just gone by;
pig's ears very much like those on the swine's head he had carried up to Swill...
And Europe had told him of the dark hints that surrounded the surgeon; and it held that if
Swill know of the kitchen furtigrade when Doctor Crispus did not, he might be well aware of
other secret ways, even down to the moldering cellars. Why, truly, would he need his deliveries
of body parts if not to make a rever-man? ... And there was the flayed skin.
Swill is a black habilist. A massacar!
The horrid, impossible ideas rolled about his mind's view, an image of the surgeon
clandestinely making gudgeons in his attic apartment: wobbling, raving creatures cobbled
together from kitchen offcuts and dug-up corpse bits, then held and hidden in the fortress's depths.
The young lighter could little fathom how such a capital evil as monster-making — or
“fabercadavery,” as the peregrinate called it — could go on undiscovered within Winstermill's
precincts. How was it possible that amid such a crowd of zealous invidists monsters were
actually made?
With low and stuttering urgency, Rossamünd explained his deductions as best he could. He
talked mostly to Europe, who listened without interruption, her arms folded and her brow deeply
creased with a scowl.
"The rever-man had pig's ears," he repeated excitedly. "I carried a pig's head up to Swill from
the kitchens. That's why he reads from those banned books — they are full of all manner of ashdabblings."
"Well, one hardly needs to be auto-savant to have spotted Swill as a nefarious cad!" Threnody
argued.
A great roar of applause erupted about all levels of the Saloon: Hero had come to the end of
her recital and was now bowing deeply to her adoring audience with great, cheek-busting smiles.
Threnody looked down at it all and curled her lip. "Yes, well, I suppose she was passable," she
sneered as she clapped politely.
Rossamünd barely heard her of the cheers. Swill is a massacar! Sebastipole said he had not
found how the rever-man could have got in: the fortress really was impregnable. It would not
have to be if the abomination was already being kept inside Winstermill — indeed if it had been
made there in the deep parts. Was it mere coincidence that Rossamünd had found his way out
only through the Master-of-Clerks' rooms? Swill was most certainly his man, brought in
especially. It all fitted too horribly.
"My, what a hive of troubles you have kicked," the fulgar said. "The Soratchë were right to
suspect him, it seems, though one thinks they might have pressed their suspicions a little further."
Threnody made a face as if to say she did not think much of the Soratchë.
"But why do such a terrible thing?" Rossamünd could to fathom it.
"Why else, little man, but for the oldest reason of all?" The fulgar paused. "Money, of
course. There is much to be made for the making and trafficking of rever-men and other mademonsters — as you have seen firsthandedly, with that filthy little Poundinginches or whatever his
name might have been."
Rossamünd nodded. What precious relief it had been when Europe had rescued him from that
vile rivermaster and set him to the harbor-bottom with one arc to his beefy chest.
"All manner of people manage to require the service of the dark trades," the fulgar continued.
"I have already caught the whispers of at least two rousing pits within reach of here, and they are
genuinely lucrative for those at the right end of the wagers. These must be supplied, and it seems
Swill is the man to do so."

The young lighter shivered at the implication of her words.
"If you know of such horrid places, why do you to do something about them?" Threnody
interjected. "Or tell someone who will?"
Europe's expression became owlish. "Because, my dear, if I have heard rumors, then others
certainly will have too. The excisemen and obstaculars and your once-sisters are better fitted to
the chore."
"But rousing-pits have monsters in them," Threnody continued querulously. "Surely that
should move you!"
Europe fixed her with that dangerously glassy stare.
"Child, I am not some mindless invidist. I rid the world of teratologica for money's hand, not
sport."
Threnody locked eyes with her.
Rossamünd ducked his head at the fizzing tension between these two lahzarines. He wanted
to intervene, yet did not dare tangle with the friction between them, as inscrutable as the
movements of the planets. In the end the standoff proved unbearable and he spoke. "What of the
Master-of-Clerks?" he tried. "Swill is his man. Doctor Crispus said so."
"Every mad habilist needs a patron." Europe sounded almost flippant, though her grim
expression told otherwise.
"Why did you not speak of this before, lamp boy?" Threnody growled.
"Because I did not think of it till now, Threnody," Rossamünd sighed.
"I must write of all this to Mother!"
"For the little she might do," said Europe, "with the clerk-master sitting in control behind
those unapproachable walls and little proof to go on but one small bookchild lampsman's
conjectures."
"She is a great woman," Threnody bridled, "and will do more that soe to rid the Empire of a
traitor."
"But what if I'm wrong?"
"If you are then rumors are exploded, suspicions disabused and everyone goes on to other
troubles," Europe said bluntly. "Yet for now we have the suggestion of serious, dastardly things
little man," she said. "Gudgeons loose in Winstermill, marshal-peers summoned to the subcapital
and prentice sent too far east: something is truly, deeply amiss in your reach of the world. Keep
your eyes wide, Rossamünd. You are in a dangerous tangle if all this turns out true. It may be
that your assignment to Wormstool is not a simple lapse in wisdom." She reached over to put a
hand on his shoulder. "You should have become my factotum after all," she said wryly.
Rossamünd could not help but agree. He could not now think of anywhere safer than by
Europe's side. He noticed Threnody was looking at him with an envious scowl.
Europe summoned a footman and made provision for their bunking. There was no room
elsewhere in the wayhouse. "You can join me in my quarters if you wish, Rossamünd There is a
bed for one other there," the fulgar explained. "Or you may join your friend in the dog-dens."
The "dog-dens" were the billet-boxes, tight cupboards — barely comfortable but inexpensive
accommodation that all wayhouses possessed. Rossamünd felt such a strange and unwelcome
tearing of loyalties he did not know how to act. In the end he chose to stay with Threnody,
figuring that she had joined him voluntarily and stuck by him, and so he should do the same and
sleep in the squash of the billet-boxes. The girl lighter was clearly gratified by his decision,
looking as if she had just won some great moral victory.
With an enigmatic sniff, Europe paid the reckoning and bid them good sleeping. "I must
retire. A girl needs her sleep to keep her beauty." At that she left, reemerging surprisingly on the
farther side of the Saloon to speak quietly with the horn-wearing caladine.
Seeing this, Threnody demanded, "Why does she talk to her? "
"Probably to let her know of our suspicions about Swill." Rossamünd's hopes lifted.
Distracted by Threnody, he did to see Europe leave, but when he looked again he had disappeared

to some other part of the wayhouse to do whatever occult things that fulgars did in the night
hours.
With her departure Threnody leaned across the claustra. "Well, she is a disappointment—"
she said, "dull and ordinary and not at all heroic. And I thought I wanted to be like her."
Utterly baffled and not wanting a fight, Rossamünd ignored her and stared out a that the
emptying Saloon.
"You don't really want to be her factotum, do you?" Threnody persisted, a hint of that envious
look returning. "Being with her is like sucking on a lime dusted in bothersalts."
No, Threnody, that's what it's like being with you! The bitter thought rose unbidden, but
Rossamünd said, "I've made oaths to serve the Emperor, Threnody. I've accepted his Billion. I'm
not free to be anyone's factotum — Miss Europe's, yours or even Atopian Dido's, were she still
alive!"
Apparently satisfied, Threnody too took her leave and went off to find a place to make her
plaudamentum.
Rossamünd was left to be shown to his billet-box alone.

22
The Ignoble End of The Road
rimple a curious-looking hairy-leather purse made from the entire skin of a small rodent, shaved, with a drawstring
at the neck hole, and the skin of one limb sewn back on itself as a loof to fix onto a belt. Actually looking like some
bloated rat, a rimple is all the fashion as a coin-bag among the wayfaring classes.

T

he new day and Europe, teeth still blackened from her morning dose of plaudamentum,
met the two frowsty young lighters as they were arranging themselves in the stabulary to leave
with the first post.
"How was your night in the dog-dens?" she asked a little tartly.
"Like sleeping inside a sideboard drawer." Rossamünd yawned. "I do not fathom how older
folk can manage a single blink."
Europe simply nodded. That was the sum of her sympathy. "I will be answering a plea for
aid from some sorely put and well-heeled people for Bleak Lynche," she explained to the sleepdeprived pair. "They need help with a gudgeon, wouldn't you know. It would appear we are
going on a concomitant path, little man." Europe looked at Rossamünd pointedly. "So you shall
wait for me as I complete my dealings with the knavery-underwriter and we shall travel together."
Rossamünd agreed readily.
Threnody did not even acknowledge that the fulgar had spoken, speaking only when Europe
had left them. "So we are to do everything she says, are we?"
"Hmm" was all Rossamünd replied as he stretched, arms in the air, to rid himself of the kinks
and knots gained through his insalubrious night's sleep. Their arrival at Wormstool was not
expected; the delay of an hour or two would change nothing.
They waited in the knavery. There, as Threnody penned a letter to her mother, Rossamünd
wrote two of his own, one to Sebastipole and the other to Doctor Crispus. He told them in
guarded terms of this suspicions regarding Swill and the rever-man beneath Winstermill. It was
worth running the risk of prying eyes if someone who might be able to do something were to
know.
During the delay Threnody decided to liberally apply some flowery-sweet perfume, splashing
enough to challenge the salty-sweetness of bosmath, Europe's signature scent. Where she had
procured the essence from Rossamünd did not know, but the funk of it filled the knavery waiting
room.
The morning was well advanced by the time Europe's negotiations with the knaveryunderwriter were completed.
With the proof of the head she carried in the sack, her prize was paid and her forearm etched
by the punctographist on hand, with another small cruciform of monster blood. One less monster
to trouble the lives of man. Consequently the three left with the third post of the day.
"It's a post-and-six," Threnody declared optimistically. "We should make good time."
Leaving the missives with the knavery-clerks, to whom they paid 4g a letter to have them
properly sealed, they ventured out under a flat gray sky to the cheerful, unseasonal warbling of a
magpie. The carriage was badly sprung and very noisy, rendering conversation below a constant
shout impossible. For Rossamünd this was a small mercy, filling the frosty, aromatic silence
between fulgar and wit with welcome clamor.
Across the Sourspan and over the Bittermere the lentum-and-six jerked and shuddered
uncomfortably. No longer following a watercourse, the Wormway traversed hill and dale, the
apex of most rises giving Rossamünd a grand view of the land about. The green upon the downs
was grayer, the trees sprouting from them sparse and gnarled, growing in the shadows of

enormous granite boulders lichen-blotched and anciently weathered. Indeed, the entire quality of
the land declined markedly only a few leagues east of the Bittermere. There was rumor of
loneliness here, Rossamünd growing more certain of it the farther the lentum carried them — an
absence of people, yet an absence of monsters too. In the struggle to possess it, the land had
become useless to both.
They passed Bitterbolt and watered horses at the sturdy sprawling fortalice of Mirthalt. There
the lighters wore dogged expressions and barely reacted to the premature advent of the young
lighters.
They arrived at Compostor in the mist of day's end. Bigger than Hinkerseigh, it was built on
a broad hill, its curtain walls descending into foggy vales on all sides. There was a genuine air of
money in this small city of long, broad avenues of stately sycamores and multistoried manors, of
wide parks as green and tame as the land without was gray and wild.
"Tonight we shall stay somewhere out of the way," Europe pronounced as they were granted
entry to the city by the heavy-harnessed watch. She directed the lentermen to a hostelry called the
Wayward Chair. From the outside it was a modest establishment, but the room proved a high
standard at odds with the humble façade. Regardless, Threnody oozed dissatisfaction.
Throughout the leg from the Brisking Cat to here, she had sat gingerly, leaning forward to spare
herself the bumping of the carriage seat. Now she looked terribly wayworn and irritated, lagging
behind as they were shown to their rooms by a pucker-faced bower maid.
They were successfully installed in the apartment: luggage deposited, beds turned, the fire
stoked, food brought and Europe's treacle brewing in the kitchens. Without a word, Threnody
exited the room, her makings in hand, slamming the door as she left.
"I don’t know what ails her." Rossamünd felt he needed to apologize.
"It is just night-pains, little man."
"Night-pains?"
"Indeed." Europe sat in a glossy leather recliner before the hearth. "All lahzars must endure
them and wits more so than fulgars. It is the cost of having these unusual organs inside — the
price of power, if you like. A little bit of justice, I do not doubt some might think."
After about as much time as it took to brew plaudamentum the girl returned, still in foul
spirits. She stomped right past the two, glaring at them both, and disappeared into the adjoining
room where a bower maid was turning down the beds. There was a shout and the maid hurried
out, looking even more puckered and near tears.
"That will be all, my dear," Europe said, handing the quickly brightening maid a whole sou.
"You may go."
Listening to the thump and bluster of the girl in the bedroom, Rossamünd asked, "Miss
Europe? How can we stop Swill and the Master-of-Clerks?"
"I have warned that Saphine lass you may remember from that Cat, and you have written your
letters." Europe peered at him, her hazel eyes intent, thoughtful. "Beyond that there is not much
else, and even what we have is unsubstantial. I think you will find it very hard to lay a solid
accusation against Swill or his clerk-master. If they have been able to carry on as black habilists
right under the lighter's feet, then you may be certain, Rossamünd, they will have all traces of
their dabblings well in hand and can easily obliterate any trails that might lead to them."
"But I fought with their rever-man!" Rossamünd persisted. "I saw the flayed skin! There —
there was even that butcher's truck that smelled of swine's lard, just like Poundinch used to hide in
his cargo, that's why the Trought attacked!"
"At this instant it would be what you say against what they would say," Europe countered
calmly.
"But we have Sebastipole! No one doubts a falseman!"
The fulgar took a deep breath. "And I am sure they would have a falseman of their own. Use
one falseman to cancel the other out — typical Imperial politics."

"Who can stop them, then?" Rossamünd despaired, an image of Laudibus Pile's sneering face
looming in his imagination.
"Well, it certainly won't be you, little man, will it — sent out her at their very behest?"
"No." Rossamünd hung his head.
"And with Whympre the current lord of Winstermill," Europe continued, pressing the point, "I
cannot see how they will be stopped in a hurry."
"You could, Miss Europe."
Europe laughed a strange, sardonic laugh. "Oh, little man!" she sighed. "Rescuing empires
from their own corruption is not my game. You'll just have to trust that all wicked things bring
themselves to an end in the end."
"But who says what is wicked?" Rossamünd blurted.
"Enough now," the fulgar said with sudden impatience. "You wax too philosophical for
weary travelers."
The young lighter ducked his head in apology.
"Do not speak of these things to another, do you understand me?" Europe said sharply. "They
will not believe you, and word of any loose talk or unguarded accusation might find its way to the
wrong ears."
"Aye, Miss Europe." The young lighter retreated to his comfortable bed. He slept eventually.
His last sight through the door ajar was the motionless fulgar lost in her unfathomable
recollections before the dying embers in the hearth.
*

*

*

*

*

The new morning world was sunk in fog. The lenterman was cautious and they left
Compostor at a measured crawl. Threnody's wind had improved little since yesternight and she
dozed and stared out the opposite window and said naught.
There was little to see from the window but fathomless gray until the lentum slowly crested a
hill and drew clear of the obscuring shroud. Rossamünd was graced with a view that until now he
never knew possible: all about was a puffy lake of cloud, glowing a russet golden-white in the
climbing light, lapping at the contours of spur and gully as an ocean touches the sandy shore.
Other hilltops poked through and made dark islands in the stark fog sea. On one pinnacle about a
mile distant, Rossamünd thought for a moment he spied movement. He looked closer and saw a
large, long-limbed something gamboling in the drear, cold dawn looking for all the world to be
hooting at the glaring day-orb. It must have very tall indeed to be visible for so far, but as he
went to call his fellow traveler's attention to it, the carriage descended into the murk and the
unsettling sight was obliterated.
"Such things are common here," Europe said in answer to his hurried, hollered description.
"This remains true ditchland, whatever maps might say. Here monsters have free rein and are
stopped only by walls and vigilance — and me," she finished, a twinkle in her eye.
The brume persisted for much of the first half of the day, lifting only slightly to hang above
drizzling blanket. In the haze loomed the Wight, raised where two trunk roads met with the
highway. The fortress-city had grown rich on tolls extracted from grain trains coming down from
Sulk and luxury trading caravans going north. Negotiating its streets, Rossamünd saw that the
military very much intruded on the public: watchtowers in municipal squares, barracks fronting a
common park with its soldiers monopolizing the green for their evolutions. Nevertheless, women
in tentlike dresses promenaded with parasols and met with men in finest silks. Together these
would take their spiced and scented infusions in public places of high fashion and then be carried
home in gilt, leather-covered mule-litters.
Insisting on a change of carriage as well as team, Europe took them to a tiny corner shop
known as a small-market or kettle. It was a cluttered affair, full of such a disparity of goods that
it took Rossamünd some time to even orient himself before being able to decide on purchases.

With much of his money — almost a full year's worth — still encumbering his wallet, Rossamünd
first bought a fine black thrice-high with satin-rimmed edges. It squatted rebelliously on his
bandage, refusing to sit right, and became so annoying he removed the dressing so that the hat
might fit as it should.
"I don't know the nature of the wound you had," declared Threnody, peering at his scalp, "but
there is no evidence of it now."
Rossamünd also purchased a quarter of a rind of his old favorite — fortified sack cheese; a
small jar of preserved apricots; dried fruits; half a cured pork sausage; and boschenbread. This
last was just like from home: golden-dark and doughy, with a scrumptious hint of ginger.
Verline had made boschenbread every Bookday, enough for every foundling. He carried two
pounds of the stuff away in a big brown bag and shared it liberally with a quietly bemused
Europe, with Threnody — who declared she did not like it and left her piece barely nibbled —
and even the bemused lentermen.
A new lentum took them out of Wightfastseigh. The replacement carriage was a public coach
rather than the post, better sprung, with windows covered in iron grille work, and carrying an
extra backstepper, a quartertopman who held a salinumbus and rode alongside the splasher boy.
It was a vehicle intended for travel in threatened places. It was also quieter on the road.
On this side of the fortress-city they began to pass wayfaring metal-mending tinkers, scriptselling pollcarries and brocanders shopping their secondhand proofing; those who dared the
dangerous way in hope that isolation might make people willing to buy their inferior goods. The
life expectancy of such as these would not have been long and only desperation could surely drive
someone to such work; Rossamünd had a sudden glimpse of his privileges, when measured
against the lot of these ragged gyrovagues.
As Ashenstall drew near, its window-lights and lanterns glowing merrily against the dour
evenfall, the post-lentum eased its pace, its driver clearly intending on making that cothouse their
night-stop.
"I have no desire to spend a night in the insalubrious squish of one of your cot-rents," Europe
declared testily. She pulled down the grille and rattled her purse ostentatiously at the lenterman,
shouting, "Drive on! Take us to the Prideful Poll. It will be well worth the anxiety if you
persevere!"
There was a hasty discussion between the carriage-men and a quick conclusion.
The lentum pressed on, going faster now.
Rossamünd could hear the horses' frequent whickering, even over the clangor of the carriage's
hasty progress. They well knew the unfriendliness of the dark and — shabraqued or not — the
tasty treat they presented to night-prowling nickers.
The sun was an hour set and the waning moon well up on its course when Europe pointed
through the grille of the window at a square, keeplike structure with a rounded roof built into the
cutting on the northern side of the highroad right opposite a great-lamp. Its own gate lanterns
made a well-lit spot upon the road before the thick encircling wall. Suspended between them was
a circular sign with the silhouette of a proud-looking head and large white letters beneath that
read Prideful Poll.
Another wayhouse.
They drew into the slender coach yard and a warm welcome as strong gates closed out the
nighttime fears.
*

*

*

*

*

The next morning, though their rimples were decidedly fatter after Europe's financial
incentives, the public-coach lentermen were unwilling to take her and her two young passengers
down onto the Frugelle. The nighttime dash to the Prideful Poll was one thing, but a trot along

that threatened place was "quite another tan of leather!" s the side-armsman put it. "No amount of
counters will get us to shift down onto that there dour place."
Not at all inclined to argue, Europe dismissed them, declaring, "No matter, we shall take the
next post east."
Post lentermen were more game than public coachers.
As they waited, the woman and the girl sipped the Prideful Poll's best claret, while
Rossamünd stared from an east-facing window at the bleak view. Below was a gray arid plain
strewn with countless tufts of dark vegetation. His Imperial Highness' Highroad, the Conduit
Vermis, ran out like an anchor cable down on the flat, going steadily east, curving slightly south
as it did. This stretch before him showed on the maps as the Pendant Wig. More than a league
away Rossamünd could see a tiny structure by the road — a cothouse: Patrishalt. The thrum of
loneliness was a constant pang here — subtle threwd exquisitely balanced between threat and
welcome. He could feel it through the glass, fluttering within him uncomfortably.
They did not wait long. The day's first post pulled into the cramped coach yard with a
trumpet blast, bearing no passengers and keen to take some on board. Out in the yard the
monotonous wind wailed its melancholy up from the eastern lowlands, bring a faint stink of rot
on its breath. With a quick inspection that all their luggage was intact, Rossamünd entered the
coach and they were away. Speed was a traveler's best defense out here.
The Wormway wound down the flanks of the hills, following a shaft cleft eroded by a
seasonal brook. The post-lentum gathered momentum as it descended the face of the hills. It
crossed the Lornstone, an old brick bridge that spanned a gully thick with sighing swamp oaks
and stunted pines. On seven great arches the Wormway crossed the bridge and continued along
on a stone dike that reached out for a mile into the Frugelle. The great flat was a continuous low
thatch of thorny, stramineous stubble. Trees collected in dell or hollow, writhen, dwarfish things,
their gray trunks rough and fissured. The unsettled threwd nagged persistently, not foe but
certainly not friend.
The travelers' breath steamed inside the lentum cabin. Threnody shivered, glared at the
glimpse of frosty sky showing through the grill of the lentum windows and wrapped her furs
closer about.
Europe proved unperturbed by it all, rugged in a long, thickly furred guque, hair down in a
long plait; she watched everything through her pink quartz-lensed spectacles with regal
equanimity. Nothing reached her, and for this Rossamünd was deeply grateful. For no matter
how the lugubrious threwd pressed in or the chill gripped, the young lighter felt that all things
might be compassed with the Branden Rose at the lead.
"My, this is a dreary land," she said, looking around at her two companions. "Yes?"
Rossamünd nodded.
From her den of furs Threnody raised an eyebrow and barely shrugged.
"And dreary company too..." Europe arched her spoored brow.
Along his side of the road Rossamünd discovered the low, half-buried strongworks he had
first spied between Makepeace and Hinkerseigh. This time they were positioned at every third
lamp, looking very much like sunken fortifications. But to what purpose? Rossamünd wondered.
Built on the connection with the northeast running Louth-Hurry Road, Patrishalt was much
like every other cothouse they had passed. With nothing to recommend it as a rest-stop, the
lentum delivered a small amount of mail and carried on.
The country varied little, and by the time they achieved Cripplebolt two hours later, all three
passengers were dozing. When the lentum was back on its way east with a fresh, new-shabraqued
team, Rossamünd tucked into the provender bought at Wightfastseigh. Threnody grimaced from
over her duodecimo with open disgust as he chewed on the pork sausage in one bite and took a
spoon of preserved apricots, plopping about in their earthen jar, in another.
Hiss-CRACK! A musket shot just above shattered the delight of his light repast. It was
followed by a short series of thumps joining the din of travel, a pause and then Hiss-CRACK!

"What is happening?" cried Rossamünd, ducking at the smack of the second discharge. A
puff of gun-smoke burst above, on his side of the lentum, to be whipped away by wind of the
vehicle's passage.
"I think you'll find they are warning off a passing nicker," Europe said calmly.
Threnody clambered over to the same side and joined him in a search of the passing land
without, frustrated that her view was blocked by the window-grille. "I cannot see what they shoot
at," she complained, leaning over Rossamünd. "They'd better hit it, the cheeky bugaboo!" she
hissed.
"For the nicker's sake let's hope they do." Europe peered briefly through the window-grille.
"It would be a kinder death to have a musket ball in your meat than come to hand strokes with
me."
There were no further shots and no beast assailed them. The lentum made good time on this
flat straight road, and in the paleness of the eastern quarter of the evening sky they spied the
rectangular towers of a settlement a-sparkle with lights easily seen from the straightness of the
plain. The township of Bleak Lynche.
As the lentum drew closer, Rossamünd could see that every structure was three or four stories
tall, raised close together and with no gate nor surrounding wall to protect them. How is that
possible! It was only as they entered the town and crept between these towers that he realized
none of the buildings had ground-level doors opening out to the dangerous world. The higher
stories were accessed from the ground only via retractable iron ladders, and an arrangement of
covered walks — the lynches — stretched the short gaps between structures, their weight carried
on sturdy arches.
The hard-packed dirt of the Wormway went right through the middle of the town, leading
them to a small wayhouse called the Fend & Fodicar, its sign a fodicar and a spittende crossed.
Upon the other hand was a large oblong fort of four levels and, like every other building here, a
flattened gable roof of red tiles. This was Bleakhall, the lamplighters' bastion and the only
structure to be surrounded by a wall, which protected a coach yard and steep stairs to a third-story
door. With the yell of it s horn the post-lentum was let through gates as thick and tall as the
bronze portals of Winstermill and rattled slowly into the tight area within, brightly lit by slowburning flared lifted up on lampposts. A quarto of heavy-harnessed haubardiers met the carriage
and humbly did the tasks of yardsmen: helping the lentermen take the horse-team in hand,
organizing the setting down of the luggage. The postilion opened the doors of the lentum and
lowered the folding step, handing the women out of the cabin. The haubardiers were puzzled by a
calendar in lighter's vestments and they were downright astounded by the dangerous graces of the
fulgarine peeress. Europe played the part with practiced ease, feigning ignorance at their awe
with a studied grandness. Threnody met them with her typical superciliously lifted chin.
Rossamünd just helped to carry the bags.
The three were shown up the steps through a door of solid black iron, the postilion following
after with a mailbag. Beyond was an antechamber slit with murder holes in roof and wall. A
cheerful “halloo” from their haubardier guide, and a second black door at the farther end was
winched open. Europe, Rossamünd and Threnody were admitted to a watch room furnished
sparely with a clerical desk, a large clock and other doors to left and right.
They were met by a young man in a powdered scratch-bob, standing behind the desk. He was
wearing the unmistakable white oversleeves of an altern-lighter and the same surprised expression
as all the other officers of previous cothouses at the sight of newly made, newly arrived lighters.
Stuttering a little at Europe's steady scrutiny, he greeted them all stiffly. As he sorted through the
few items in the mailbag, informed them that their Major-of-House and Lamplighter-Captain
were away at Haltmire for an urgent conference with the Warden-General. "How-be-it, young
lampsmen. You have come to reinforce us?"
"No, sir, we're meant for Wormstool," Rossamünd explained.

"Wormstool, is it?" The altern looked a little put out. "Well, they need it more, I suppose,
though we are all sorely put. You can journey there with the lantern-watch tomorrow morn. I'll
have the costerman take your donnage across later in the day."
"I'll set owt termorrer," the costerman drawled with a thick Sulk End accent, entering at the
altern-lighter's summons. Squarmis was the man's name. He was a withered, greasy fellow in
many heavy layers of cheap proofing and a short-tailed liripipium. There was something
indefinably odd about the man, something vague and unsettling. For a dread instant, Rossamünd
swore he caught a hit of swine's lard on the fellow. When he thought no one was paying him any
mind he sniffed more deeply, but only got a nose full of the man's natural unwashed odors and the
waft of strong drink.
Squarmis looked at them shrewdly. "A jink for yer goods in the cart will cost ye one an' six."
Even Rossamünd could tell one sequin, six guise was thievery for such a short ride. It was
more than the young lighter was paid for a month of prenticing.
"You must be jesting," said Threnody, incredulous. "How can you practice such domestic
brigandry?"
"We all have owr burthens, miss," Squarmis said with an unctuous smile and fingers greedily
gripping for the fare. "Does ye wants yer parcels delivered safe across this nasty world or does ye
not?" The avaricious fellow was so brazen he was not daunted by the presence of Europe.
"This is your best service, Lieutenant?" the fulgar queried the young altern-lighter, talking as
if the costerman were not there.
Blushing slightly, he bowed a little. "My apologies, ma'am, th-this scoundrel is all there is to
offer. He has been g-given sole commission to work here by the Master-of-Clerks office, so we
have little choice."
"Very well."
Before the costerman slunk away the altern passed him a red-leather wrapped dispatch, an
official document normally sent only by the marshal — in this case the Marshal-Subrogat,
Podious Whympre. "This has arrived for you," the young officer said.
What does Podious want with him so far out here?
Squarmis took the dispatch between smudgy fingers. "Thems will be my orders from yer
surpeereeors." He leered knowingly and wandered back through the side door from which he had
come.
Blushing, the altern-lighter apologized once again then asked of Rossamünd and Threnody,
"How would you like to meet your new comrades?"
"I think a time of rest for us all at your wayhouse would do better," Europe cut in quickly.
"Camaraderie can come later."
"Ah — right you are madam." With an open palm, he gestured them to follow. He took them
through a door and down a passage over the high lynche that connected cot-house to wayhouse.
Though it was covered with its own tiled roof, the sides were open to the winds, and an eerie
inhuman ululation carried faintly from the flatlands. Somewhere inside the bastion the muffled
yammering of the cothouse dogs and the answering shouts of their tractors could be heard. The
altern seemed hardly to notice as he guided them.
The Fend & Fodicar's enrica d'ama, Goodwife Inchabald, greeted them all familiarly. "Oh,
“ello, my darlings! Come for a taste of me hasty pie, ‘ave you?"
"Her fare is as poor as her welcome is warm," Threnody murmured into her plate when their
meals were served.
"Miss Europe, what of this rever-man you have to dispatch?" Rossamünd asked.
The fulgar took a sip of beer and betrayed only the slightest distaste. "There are people who
dare to actually live out there on the flat," she said, "and out there is where I am to go. Some
puzzled eeker-folk with more sequins than sense, it seems, have a rever-man in residence in their
cellar. My intermediary is a fellow here by the name of Dimbleby: I am to find him tomorrow.
More than that I do not know."

"What is it doing out here?"
"The rever-man? Who can say?" Europe sighed wearily. "It might have escaped from a
strong room in the mines up north."
"Maybe it is one of Swill's," Threnody added.
"It could have come from a rousing-pit," Rossamünd put in. "There is probably one out here
too."
"It might have." The fulgar was starting to sound a little exasperated. "Out in this rustic
remoteness anything might be."
"Will you be taking help?" Joining her on the hunt for a gudgeon was factotum work
Rossamünd would be happy to do.
Europe let out a puff of air and reviewed the room and its few hard-bitten patrons. "In the
morning I will attempt to find myself a lurksman among these frowsty folk. If it weren't for your
oaths of service I would take you too."
"Why are you so insistent on Rossamünd as your factotum?" Threnody demanded.
The fulgar looked at Threnody as if seeing her for the very first time. "Child, do not mistake
my tolerance of you for acceptance."
Threnody's mouth opened then shut, but no sound came out. She looked to Rossamünd,
dropped her eyes and looked mortified for a merest twinkling. With admirable spirit, she
recovered, and, chin jutting proudly, ate the rest of her tasteless meal.
There was a long, unpleasant silence.
Europe ate little more, and soon left the two young lighters, to inquire of a bed for the night
and board for an indeterminate duration. Threnody took out a duodecimo and read as if
Rossamünd was not there. To pass time, he sorted through his salumanticum, resettling vials and
jars, salperts and castes, all in their padded boxes or cushion pockets, making the most necessary
scripts easy to extract.
Europe returned, her arrangements made. "I'm glad to see you're in a habilistic turn of mind,"
she said. "How would you take to trying your hand once more at making my treacle, little man?
— to keep your practice up?"
"I might as well make you some too, Threnody, if I'm already at it."
"No!" she said frostily. "Stop asking me."
Stung, Rossamünd took up Europe's lacquered treacle-box — remembering only too well how
uneasy it had made him feel — and allowed himself to be led to the small kitchen. There, while
Europe left to arrange her luggage and Goodwife Inchabald hovered nervously to make sure he
did not spoil her clean stoves, Rossamünd brewed. He discovered the steps of making were vivid
in his mind and Sugar of Nnun still filled him with sickly dreads. The disturbing half smell of the
finished treacle filled the closed space.
"Well done, little man," Europe said quietly, reappearing as if drawn by the reek. With a toss
of her head and those unladylike gulps she drained the bowl. "Well, good night, Rossamünd," she
continued — Rossamünd trying not to stare at her stained mouth — "Tomorrow I knave myself in
earnest, and you will be on your way to your lonely billet. I shall be about if you have need of
me. Remember well my warning at Compostor." Her voice dropped to a whisper. "Keep what
you know to yourself. It will profit no one just babbled about — and don’t' go getting yourself
maimed or slaughtered." She looked at him until the young lighter felt like a squirming worm on
a hook.
"Good-bye, Miss Europe," Rossamünd whispered. He felt like he was ever saying this to her.
Without another word the fulgar gathered her treacle-box and departed, leaving the young
lighter to make his way back across the lynche to Bleakhall, passing Threnody without
acknowledgment.
Halfway across the bridge she caught up with him. "What, no Brambly Rose? How ever will
you get on without her?" she said sardonically. "How you can stomach her hoit-a-toit I do not
know." Threnody sniffed sourly. "I can see well now why Mother does not like her."

"I would have thought your mother's dislike of her would have recommended Europe to you,"
he countered.
She fixed him with a withering eye. "Well, I go to make my own treacle, as any good lahzar
should. You should come and see how it is really done."
Rossamünd declined.
"I shall leave you to your moon dreams of the Lady Europe, then!"
Baffled and tired, Rossamünd did not offer a response.
Across in Bleakhall the kindly altern showed him to a long, open hall with benches for meals
at one end and a double row of cots at the other, all beneath a lofty ceiling a-crowd with exposed
beams. The distinct, dank smell of seldom-washed men mixed with wood-smoke and lock-oil:
the telltale odor of a cothouse and something a little more acrid and unpleasant. After three days
in the funk of a lentum cab shared with tow perfumed women, Rossamünd had lost his dullness to
the smell of too many men together. He tried not to breathe too deeply.
It was the full of night now, and the lantern-watch from Wormstool had already arrived, their
lighting done. They were sitting with their Bleakhall brothers about the common table drinking
bottles down to the mud, swapping bawdy jokes and playing at checkers. They seemed hard and
rough, like the Hogshead bargemen, but altogether much neater and thoroughly clean. For all
their coarse language and rough manners, they seemed careful with how they looked, cursing at
each other if ever a splash or splatter threatened to soil their harness. Each wore a baldric of
Imperial red: they were citizens of the Empire, claiming no particular stately heritage.
Rossamünd felt very dull and frowzy. He noticed Threnody, who had soon returned — teeth
slightly stained with plaudamentum — self-consciously pull and play at her hems and fringes
whenever she thought the lampsmen were not looking.
She barely acknowledged him, however.
The "Stoolers," those lighters — Rossamünd quickly learned — from Wormstool, and the
"Bleakers" were fascinated by the two young arrivals, but especially Threnody. She made much
of being superior to their attentions, yet from Rossamünd's vantage she relished every rough jest
or idle tease.
"How come they're sending them out to ye?" a Bleakhall lighter asked. "We need
replacements just as much..."
"More's the point: what's the Marshal doin' billetin' such pink l'il morsels out to us?" one
extraordinarily hairy Stooler — one Under-Sergeant Poesides — added.
"Aye!" Rossamünd heard one lighter whisper theatrically to a brother-in-arms. "What do they
take us for, wet nurses?"
"Doesn't he know we eat 'em alive out here?" Poesides added, raising sinister chuckles from
his amused colleagues.
Rossamünd grinned sheepishly.
Threnody sniffed superciliously as she said sourly, "You might find us a little hard to chew!"
inciting a general "ooooh" and loud laughter.
"I can see thy arrow-spoor, Miss Muddle!" A rather thick-set sergeant sporting raven-hued
mustachios and a bulbous nose grinned and pointed to Threnody's brow. Isambard Mulch was his
name. "Going to fish our heads from inside our tummies after we've eaten ye, are ye?"
Some small lighter, old enough to surely have earned retirement, aped exaggerated actions of
eating then keeled over, clutching dramatically at his head and stomach. The laughter became a
roar, Rossamünd joining them. Even Threnody broke a smile.
"Ahhh there, lads," Sergeant Mulch cried, pointing to the girl's reluctant grin, "she's humanhearted after all!"
Her smile vanished and the guffaws roared louder still.
Perhaps service at the ignoble end of the road might not be so wretched after all.

23
Wormstool
gourmand's cork also known as a throttle or a gorge; the projecting "knuckle" of cartilage in a person's throat, in
which is situated the vocal cords; what we would call the Adam's apple. It is called the gourmand's cork (a gourmand
being one who is a gluttonous or greedy eater) because of the tight sensation you can get there when feeling
nauseated, which vulgar folk hold is the voice box trying to prevent or "cork" any further eating.

R

ossamünd was turned out into the small yard at the foot of Bleakhall the next morning to
discover thick fog smothering the land, deadening sound, diminishing light, dampening spirits.
There was no wind, not even a gentle breeze; just the clammy touch of tiny, infrequent eddies. In
the unsettling quiet the half-quarto of lampsmen who were to be his billet-mates, perhaps forever
more, said very little above common greetings and introductions. One old fellow, who presented
himself as Furius Lightbody, Lampsman 1st Class, checked the two new lamplighters' harness and
their equipage. He paused when he spotted Rossamünd's salumanticum.
"Good lad," he said. Lightbody tugged on its strap to test the repair, then patted a satchel of
his own, showing a hand missing the third and fourth fingers. "Wise. We've all got one."
Rossamünd nodded. "Why are there five of you? he asked in a hush.
"Them city-scholars say it takes three fit fellows to best a single hob-possum" was the gruff
return. "That's all well and good for them and their books, but out here we reckon five of us
stands a better chance. In truth there should be more..."
Lampsman Lightbody attached a bright-limn to the head of each of their fodicars, fixing the
bottom of the small lamps — known as crook-lights — to the shaft to prevent them for swinging
about noisily.
"Why do we not take a leer with us?" Rossamünd wondered aloud, looking worriedly at the
thick airs.
"‘Cause we don't got one to take," came the simple answer. "The Hall's fellow is with his
own lamp-watch, and Crescens Hugh — he being our own one-and-only lurksman — is offwatch. Even he needs his sleep."
Another lighter named Aubergene stood before them. He was a much younger fellow with
black hair, angular features similar to Sebastipole's and a protruding gourmand's cork that bobbed
disconcertingly as he addressed them with suppressed, whispered enthusiasm. "Don't you fuss
too much about this soup, young fellows, it's just Old Lacy," he explained kindly. "It's the
fleermare. Comes in off the Swash and leaves everything dripping, but without it there'd be no
water for us or the plants — it rains dead seldom about here. Take these... it's phlegein," he said
to Threnody's blank look at the small tubes the man held out to them, "or falsedawn if you like.
In case you lose us. Just pull the hem." He indicated a small silk protrusion on the bottle. "Strike
the raised end on the ground and hold it high, well away from your face."
Threnody went to refuse, tapping the fine-drawn arrow on her brow, as if it were an answer to
everything.
Aubergene looked at the spoor with a slight hesitation. He puffed his cheeks out and in and
said, "That'll help you find us, lass, but not us you. Take it and let us get on."
Sergeant Mulch led off, and as Rossamünd then Threnody followed the five bobbing lights
out the heavy gates of Bleakhall, Rossamünd looked back a the barely visible mass of the Fend &
Fodicar. He tried to guess which window Europe slept behind.
Leaving Bleak Lynche, it was impossible to reckon distances between lanterns. In the opaque
fumes the beclouded numbus-light of a great-lamp could be seen only when the watch drew very
near. The assiduous lampsmen worked, stoutly feeling their way one great-lamp to the next, each

lighter nothing more than the suggestion of a shadow and a bobbing globular glow,
communicating only rarely in terse whispers. Rossamünd had never been anywhere so
completely blank: anything could leap out and snatch them away. Ears were a-ring with anxious
straining, eyes bugging to keep sight of the will-o’-the-wisp gleam of the leading crook-lights.
His throat was in a constant constriction of dread; he did not know how the lamplighters of the
Frugelle ever managed to do their work without blubbering into an overwrought mass. No
amount of practice on the Pettiwiggin could have prepared him for this. It was a relief to learn
that neither he nor Threnody was expected to wind any of the lamps on this blind morning.
Nevertheless, he waited impatiently for each lamp to be wound, one — two three — up, downtw-three, one — two — three — up, down-two-three, cringing at the ringing clatter of the cogs
and chains. Though the mechanical sounds were muffled by the turgid airs, Rossamünd found
them a clashing of cymbals in the tomblike silence, sure to attract some nasty lurker.
The all-too-sluggish encroachment of the new day's growing light served only to illuminate
the fog itself, making it pale and almost phosphorescent; a yawning whiteness where the only
tangible thing was the hard-packed road grinding under his boot-soles. This luminous
nothingness obliterated any sight of the crook-lights, and forced the lantern-watch to march closer
than the regulation spacing.
Suddenly the column stopped.
Rossamünd could sense the lampsmen becoming very still.
The fellow immediately before him — Rossamünd thought it was Aubergene — crouched
and indicated the young lighter to do the same. Rossamünd obeyed and repeated the motion for
the benefit of Threnody behind.
I am the very soul of stillness. He repeated Fouracres' old formula. I am the very soul of
stillness...
Motionless and listening, he understood almost instantly. Something was snuffling in the
veiling murk off to the left, its shuffling movement faint yet obvious in the dry crackle of the
stunted Frugelle grasses. Staring out into that awful blank, Rossamünd had a prodigious sense of
the malign intent of this sniffling, searching something. He carefully, haltingly, squeezed a hand
into his salt-bag, thankful for restoring its contents. He felt for the especially wrapped johntallow — one of the unused gifts bestowed upon him by Master Craumpalin when Rossamünd
was still a foundling starting out. He withdrew it with a fastidious care lest the oiled paper make
a give-away rustling of it own. Working it free of the bag, he put the parcel on to the toad and
gingerly grasped two corners of the complex folds of the wrapping, careful not to touch the actual
wax. All this he did by feel alone, his eyes busy looking into the impenetrable fog, darting left
and right at each new noise.
Before his he could hear Aubergene ever-so-gently cocking some kind of firelock.
The snuffler was getting closer.
On the other side, Threnody was a hardly discernible shadow — was that her arm he saw
reach for her temple?
With a sudden flick of wrist and fingers, Rossamünd pulled the wrapper apart, letting out the
sweaty, unwashed smell, and, quick as fulgar's lightning, flung the john-tallow, packaging and all,
out into the cloudy soup. He could almost feel the attention of the malignant stalker catch the
smell and follow the invisible arc of the flying repugnant. Sure enough, the sounds of scuffling
moved away.
Oh, glory on Craumpalin's chemistry! Rossamünd's heart sang.
Aubergene did not appear to notice the young lighter's action and the lighters stayed as they
were for longer yet — Rossamünd's senses frayed, his haunches aching — till as a man, they
decided it was safe enough to push on. Not one mention was made of his deed; none had noticed.
The young lighter had no way of knowing if it was the john-tallow that drew the sniffling thing
away, and therefore he kept any boasts to himself.

Unexpectedly, only two lamps later, the vertical bulk of Wormstool materialized — they
were arrived at last. The cothouse — if it could be called a "house" — was a tall octagonal tower
topped with a flattened roof of red tiles a-bristle with chimneys. Entry was gained by the
ubiquitous narrow flight of stone-and-mortar steps that bent about three faces of the tower as it
climbed to a second-story door.
Rossamünd held his breath and squinted against the noxious fumes drizzling from the
moldering censer at the foot of the steps.
At the top, the thick cast-iron door opened onto a watch room. Entering, Rossamünd found
an eight-sided hall, the walls slitted with loopholes, where watchmen periodically wandered from
one to the next and mutely observed the land beyond. Not even the entry of the lantern-watch
distracted them from their lookout.
In the very middle of the hall was a squat lectern, and behind this sat an uhrsprechman.
Wet-eyed, limp-haired, the man looked all too ready for sleep, shuffling and settling papers
clumsily at the close of his night-vigil. He watched the arrivals hawkishly, screwing up his face
as he tilted his head back and peered over his glasses.
"‘Allo, Whelpmoon," the stocky, hairy under-sergeant named Poseides said to the fellow as
they passed. "Ye look a mite piqued, me old mate. Just be glad you've not had to be out there
this mornin'" pea soup so thick that a laggard couldn't scry through it — and a stalking lurker
thrown into the bargain."
Whelpmoon nodded briefly, said nothing, and kept at his staring.
Looking behind him, Rossamünd saw a great kennel occupying three whole walls which
kept a pack of dogs: spangled whelp-hounds — giant, sleek-looking creatures that eyed
Rossamünd suspiciously and let forth warning growls from their heavy-barred cage.
"Them daggies never takes to strangers," Lampsman Lightbody chuckled.
From this room the lampsmen gained access to higher floors by a wooden stair at the left of
the entrance. From it dangled a sophisticated tangle of cords and blocks, much as could be found
on a vessel. Rossamünd asked what these were for.
"Ah," answered Lampsman Lightbody eagerly, "these stairs are the genius of the major and
Splinteazle our seltzerman — naval men, both of them, with cunning naval minds." He nodded
approvingly.
Rossamünd's ears pricked at this mention of the Senior Service.
"It's dead-on impressive," Aubergene added. "You see there — that cord, how it leads up
through that collet in the ceiling? If ever a nicker or some other flinching hob makes it in here
and we need to retreat, we can pull levers up on the next floor connected to that cord and cause
this whole construction to topple, leaving the foe stuck down here while we ply fire from on
high."
It was indeed "impressive" — as an idea at least. No sooner had Rossamünd ascended a few
steps than the whole flight wobbled alarmingly, beams groaning, the rope tackle shaking. The
lighters did not seem to notice, and climbed happily up to the floor above, while Threnody and he
followed one careful step at a time, knuckles whitening on the worn-smooth banister.
Gratefully achieving the top, Rossamünd heard Aubergene declaring, "Our reinforcements
all the way from Winstermill, sir — ain't it nice to know we're not forgotten?"
Rather than dwelling safely on the very top floor of the tower, as many officer-types might,
Wormstool's Major-of-House held office in the very next level; working with his day-clerk on
one side and cot-warden on the other, all seated behind the same wide desk of thick, hard wood.
It looked solid enough to serve as barricade and fire-position should need arise. Rossamünd
could well imagine musketeers firing from behind it with their firelocks, shooting at some
intruder who had managed to win its way up the rickety stairway.
The house-major was even better turned out than his subordinates — creaseless platoon-coat
of brilliant Imperial scarlet and a black quabard so lustrous, with its thread-of-gold owl, it almost
gleamed. The man was most certainly of a naval bent, for there were several scantlings of main-

rams and cruisers pinned to the angled walls about him and a great covering of black-andwhite checkered canvas on the floor, such as Rossamünd would expect to find in the day-cabin of
a ram. The house-major stood with a fluent, perfectly military motion.
"Miss Threnody of Herbroulesse and Rossamünd Bookchild, Lamplighters 3rd Class, come
from Winstermill Manse, sir," Rossamünd said firmly as he stepped before the immaculate
officer.
The house-major fixed them with mildly skeptical amusement. "Well, aren't you a pair of
trubb-tailed, lubberly blunderers?" he exclaimed in a trim and educated accent that gave no hint
as to his origins. "We've not received a brace of lantern-sticks in a prodigious long time, and
neither have we received word to be expecting any! The dead of winter means infrequent mail
and is an off time to be sending anyone so far — how long have you been prenticing for? I
thought lantern-sticks weren't deemed fully cooked till chill's end."
Rossamünd and Threnody looked to each other.
Threnody spoke up. "We were told that Billeting Day was done early because the road was
in need of new lighters."
"Is that rightly so?" Taking his seat, the house-major stared at her and, more particularly,
her spoor. "It is not common to have one of your species make lighter, especially not one that is a
tempestine too — are you not a little too new from the crib to be cathared?"
Threnody bristled by controlled her tongue. "Perhaps."
The house-major held her with his steady gaze. "As it stands, we are thankful the Ladies of
Columbris have the numbers to spare us one here."
Bemused, Threnody gave half a curtsy.
"As to what you have been told regarding us," the officer continued, "aye, new lighters we
do need: a large quarto of doughty, veteran lampsmen to cover our losses, not a brace of newburped lumps such as yourselves. Is that not so, Sergeant-Master?" he barked to the big, silverhaired cot-warden.
"Aye, sir." The cot-warden smirked. "Though a company of the same would be better."
"I've heard it said that the marshal-lighter is ailing," continued the house-major. "Can he
have decreased in his powers so much as to send you here?"
"Oh, it wasn't the Lamplighter-Marshal, sir" — Rossamünd wrestled with the desire to cryo
out in the Marshal's defense — "it was the Master-of-Clerks who sent us."
In one breath the officer's eyes widened, in another they narrowed. "Did he..." he said
slowly. "Since when has that lickspittle been sending lighters or directing policy."
"Since the Lamplighter-Marshal was shipped off to the Considine with a sis edisserum in his
hand and ‘that lickspittle’ — who now calls himself the Marshal-Subrogat — took the run of the
manse," Threnody stated tartly.
"Is that so, Lamplighter?" The house-major looked arch. "And I'd rather you addressed me
as ‘sir’ or ‘house-major.’"
"Sir," she added after only the briefest hesitation.
The day-clerk, who had been fossicking about in the newly arrived post-bag, passed a
telltale red-leather dispatch over to the house-major.
"So the poor old war-dog has been called to account, has he?" the house-major continued,
"The bee's buzz has been that he was losing his grip of the whole ‘Way. In a fight he's your man,
but give him pens and paper and he's all a-sea... Well, it's of little use, by either hand," he
concluded, picking up the dispatch and opening it almost absently. "Most folk tend to declare this
place hic sunt beluae — here be monsters — and forget us altogether." He began to read.
Rossamünd shuffled his feet carelessly in the pregnant pause. How could they think the
great man “poor” or “old”? However, like it or no, he was not about to set his commanding
officer straight on the actual score of things.
"And here our glorious new Marshal-Subrogat confirms your report," the house-major
suddenly said, holding up the dispatch, "though I still challenge his wisdom for sending you

lantern-sticks out early. This is where only the best and hardiest get billeted. I'd say it's been an
awfully long consult-a-ledger period of time since shining-new lampsmen 3rd class were ever
billeted tous fresh out of the manse." He rattled the letter. "But here you both are, out to proudly
join the hardiest and most soldierly of all the lighters on the ‘Way." He fixed both newcomers
with appraising scrutiny. "And that means we reckon they must have sent you to us because
you're the hardiest and most soldierly of all the lighters too."
Swallowing pointedly, Rossamünd hoped he would be. "Aye, sir!" he said.
"Yes... sir," said Threnody.
"Now I know you and your situation" — the house-major stood again — "I am Major-ofHouse Thyssius Grystle," he said, bowing slightly to Threnody. "Also allow me to name CotWarden Hermogenës, or ‘Sergeant-Master’ to you." The cot-warden was slightly advanced in
years with gorgeous silver hair held back in a whipstock and an impressive scar across his
forehead. "And Linus Semple, our day-clerk" — a typically short and slender fellow in clerical
black, a deep green fronstectum jutting over his brow.
Both men stood and bowed to Threnody with civil niceness.
"Our watches are septenary, changing every Newich, and none of this slovenly two-watch
business either! There are three lantern-watches here, done in lots of two so there's enough men
on the road — and even then it's a stretch. So! Wet as your backs might be, two more is still two
more. Even though you arrived with the dimmers I'll have you stay with the sluggards till you
learn our idiosynchrasies—"
"Excuse me," Rossamünd piped, "the ‘sluggards,’ sir?"
"Aye, young lighter, the sluggards — the day-watch, as opposed to the dimmers, who are
the lantern-watch. You watch while they sleep! What have they been teaching you back
thereward — playing at skittles?"
"Ah, no, sir — sorry, sir." Rossamünd could almost feel Threnody rolling her eyes beside
him.
House-Major Grystle's expression relaxed. "You may take your ease now, Lampsmen 3rd
Class, then get to light duties after middens. The cart from Mill to Stool is a long time traveling
and I see no benefit from putting tired lighters needlessly to work. Sergeant-Master Hermogenës
shall direct you to your final billet. I imagine that oily grub goose Squarmis is bringing your ox
trunks and other dunnage?" he concluded with a knowing look.
"Aye, sir," said Rossamünd.
"Carry on. Share your first breakfast with us and get your wind back today, for tomorrow
— whatever old Grind-yer-bones might have had you doing — your life for the Emperor truly
begins. Leave your Work Dockets with me, Lampsmen. Show ‘em to their billets, Mister
Harlock."
The silver-haired Sergeant-Master took them higher into the tower, up another steep stair,
this one of sturdy, immobile stone instead, gradually winding around the entire structure as it
rose. From this proximity Rossamünd could well see the handsome scar — a cicatrice any
warrior would wish to have on display, a visible proof of valor — and more particularly, the
man's unusually pale gray eyes, nearly silver — like his hair. "You might — like just now —
hear some call me Harlock," he said with a faintly Sedian accent, while they climbed, "on account
of my hair. That's a privilege you earn. For you two peepersqueeks it'll just be Sergeant-Master,
am I clear?"
"Aye, Sergeant-Master!"
The common-mess where mains was served was found upon this next floor, two levels
higher than the front door, the region designated "the kitchens" sharing the octagonal space. The
ceiling high above was choke-full with beams and struts and supports of dark, polished wood; as
gorgeously complex an array as Rossamünd had seen before only at Bleakhall. In here, they
were told, everyone ate together, whether lampsman 3rd class or Major-of-House. Other cotfellows were already beginning to gather, and a muscular, rotund man worked the pots and ovens

on the far "kitchen" side. The third floor above the entrance, holding heavy tools and small
machines, was for specific labors: tinkering, weapon-smithing, harness-mending, lantern repairs
and the like. There was also a coop of chickens — for eggs — with a cock whose dawning crow
Rossamünd soon learned was far more effective for rousing out the day-watch than any amount of
drumming. There were stores kept here high up from the reach of rats and it was obvious now
why the ceiling of the common-mess — being also the floor of this level — was so oversupplied
with supporting woodwork.
On the top floor they were shown the bunk-rooms, set high and safe from the ground. This
level was divided into equal quarters by wooden ‘bulkheads’ — moveable walls of about eight
feet in height that stopped well short of the beams of the roof above. In the quarter farthest from
the stair was where Rossamünd and Threnody would be sleeping; sharing the quarter, so the
sergeant-master said, with the other younger lighters — both in their early twenties: Aubergene
Wellesley, whom of course they had met, and another fellow, Fadus Theudas, currently on housewatch. Rossamünd looked at the room that was to be his ‘home.’ It as not as bare as the cells of
Winstermill but gone was his privacy, his sleeping quarters to be shared again. Here the
lampsmen were allowed to decorate their own spot, tack etchings and pamphlet-cuttings onto bed
heads; have more than the standard-issue of pillows or coverlets; and their own collection of other
bed-furniture — stools, chests, side tables and the like. He realized too that though there were
eight cots in here, only two were currently occupied.
"How many lighters are here at Wormstool, Sergeant-Master?" he asked.
"Less than there ought to be, Lampsman Bookchild," the cot-warden replied. "Put what
dunnage ye have on yer billets and come down to the mess with yer kids or yer pannikins."
"I shall need privacy screens about my cot, then, if you please... Sergeant-Master," Threnody
said.
"I shall see what we can arrange for ye, lass," he said, and left the two young lighters to
settle.
"No more time to ourselves," Rossamünd observed glumly. "At least we are allowed to put
pictures up." He could think of several engravings from his pamphlets he might cut out and
display, favorites by eminent pens like Pill or Berthezene.
"Hmm." Threnody looked about with mild distaste. "It will suffice, I suppose."
Rossamünd wondered if she was beginning to regret her willfully chosen profession and her
hasty decision to throw in her lot with him.
Beds selected and bags dropped they returned down to the common-mess. Major-of-House
Grystle called for general attention and semiformally introduced them both to their new
messmates. The general reaction from the Wormstoolers was at first one of bemused
disappointment. They were of the same opinion as the house-major, and it was manifest on their
faces: Why billet lantern-stick novices with us? Send real lighters with long experience and a
steady arm in a fight.
Nevertheless, the men proved friendly, and cheerfully ate a fine breakfast of spiced, lardfried swampland mushrooms known as thrumcops and a strange kind of bacon Rossamünd was
told was made from rabbit-meat. It was all a remarkable enlargement on ‘Imperial-issue
provender,’ and Rossamünd only regretted he could not stand the smell or taste of these thrumcop
mushrooms. Instead he filled his eager belly with coney-rinds and griddle-fried toast.
"This is so much better than breakfast at the manse!" he declared, which drew the universal
approval of his new comrades.
"Aye, aye!" Lightbody nodded emphatically, looking very pleased with himself. "No short
commons for we Stoolers, lad. The world about proves bountiful for a keen eye, sharp nose and
frank aim."
"Ye can thank our round-bellied poisoner fer the fine flavors too," said Sergeant Mulch.
"Sequecious is his name, a true culinaire from up Sebastian way." He pointed to the enormously
fat man in a red and beige striped apron, grinning and frying behind a large, flat hot plate that

divided the ‘kitchen’ from the mess. "He's meant to be some kind of prisoner from them wars
Clementine and Sebastian are always in. He was sent here a year ago as a slave of the Emperor, I
suppose, but he wants to change his nativity and become a paper nationalist of the Empire,
strange fellow—"
"Cain't speak more than ‘alf a sentence of Brandenard neither," interjected Poseides. "And
we're meant to watch over ‘im and make sure ‘e don't scarper off. Though where ‘e's going to go
out ‘ere I don't know!"
"At least he's fat," argued Lightbody. "Never trust a gut-starver who bain't fat — I've been
told, ‘cause a thin one don't respect food enough to treat it right."
"What we actually lack is greens," Aubergene chattily added between chews.
"Just so," said a trim-looking man, the cothouse's dispensurist, one Mister Tynche, giving
Rossamünd a welcoming smile, "and all we lack at times are some consistent, decent
antiscorbutics. If it was not for the sovereign lime from Hurdling Migh and the nutrified wine
sent ready mixed from Quinault and the Sulk, it'd be all black gums and lethargy here."
"Which is why that wriggler Squarmis can ask so much for his goods and time," Aubergene
enlarged. "Sir!" he suddenly called across the trestle to the house-major. "Sir! Did ye hear of the
nasty lurker we almost met this dousing?"
"Aye, Gene, I surely did," House-Major Grystle replied. "It was a good thing it wandered
away like it did, else I might be less five — no, seven! — brave lighters. You can spare the
horses, but don't spare the lighters! " he cried, and all the mess joined him, chuckling heartily,
someone else calling huskily, "A confusion on the nickers!"
As one the Stoolers raised their mugs of three-water grog, took a swig and slammed their
tankards back on the trestle, making a hearty wooden clatter. Rossamünd went through the
motions and hoped no one noticed his lack of enthusiasm.
Threnody said little for the whole meal, sitting straight and taut, her eyes never leaving her
food, and anyone who attempted to speak with her soon gave up in the face of her monosyllabic
reluctance.
"What do we call you, girly?" one friendly young fellow of the day-watch tried. "Lamp-lass
3rd Class?" He chuckled in a cheerful way, as did those about him.
Threnody looked at the man sidelong, her fork hovering before her mouth. "Probably
anything but girly might be a good start," she said quietly.
"Watch out Theudas!" Sergeant Mulch guffawed. "She's got the tongue of a whip, has our
new lady lighter!" which everyone thought a great joke.
The young fellow Theudas, red-faced, went back to his eating, while Threnody looked rather
pleased with herself.
After the morning meal, dishes were collected and washed by the men of the day-watch
themselves. Rossamünd tried thanking Sequecious the Sebastian cook for a brilliant meal, to
which the man, in a thick accent simply repeated, "Tank yee! Tank yee!" with that unceasing
grin.
Dishes done, Rossamünd and Threnody were directed back to their bunks, joining the
lantern-watch for their prescribed rest. Threnody's screens were brought and erected with much
better grace than at Tumblesloe Cot. They were put about the farthest bed from the others and,
once up, the girl-lighter disappeared behind them, not to be seen again till much later.
Rossamünd organized himself, sorting satchels and bags. He pulled out a bag of
boschenbread and offered a piece to Aubergene, who was sitting on his own cot, already in a long
nightshirt.
"Why, thankee, Ros–ah–Rossamünd, isn't it?" he said to Rossamünd's offer.
"Aye," the young lighter replied, "Rossamünd — Rossamünd Bookchild of Boschenberg."
"Ahh, hence the bread and your baldric, aye?" Aubergene made a little salute with his tasty
morsel, pointing at Rossamünd's black and brown baldric, now hanging from an iron bedpost.
"So why did they billet you here, truthfully? Everyone is here because of something..."

Because the Master-of-Clerks is a conniving, wicked blackguard! Went across Rossamünd's
thoughts, but he said, "I'm not sure, it's just where they sent us." Taking Europe's warning, he
was not about to leap into some long-winded, barely believable story of events real and suspected.
"What about you?" he quickly added.
"Me? Oh, I've got a dead-frank aim, and — uh — I calfed after the wrong girl" was all he
said, leaving Rossamünd with more questions. Yet before he could ask them Aubergene himself
quickly added, with a slightly gormless smile, "Well, welcome to the Stool."
Rossamünd grinned in return.
The cots proved just as uncomfortable as Winstermill's — some things in military service
always stayed the same, it seemed. Windows were shuttered, blocking the diffuse, surprisingly
bright light coming through the fog without. He peeked through a shutter. The fume was slowly
dissolving, clearing the eastern view. The young lighter stared at the hazy horizon and could not
quite believe that maybe only a day's lentum-ride farther began one of the most feared places in
all the Half-Continent, maybe even the whole world. "Have you seen the Ichormeer,
Aubergene?"
"Aye," the lampsman replied soberly. "It's all foul bottomless bogs and stinking pools of
your heart's blood; half-dead thickets of red-leafed thornbushes and floating islands of red weed.
Every path you take is treacherous and the rot of it all stays in the back of your throat long after
you've escaped the place. I don't know how they managed to build the Wormway across it, must
have cost a whole trunk of lives." Aubergene shook his head. "What the more, it's where the
nickers are said to be born or somesuch — however that happens. You don't want to be going
there, Rossamünd. I surely never want to return."
Rossamünd listened with rapt attention. Despite — or perhaps because of — the
lampsman's lurid description, he was more keen to see the infamous place. Lying down to sleep,
he found his imagination ran for the longest time with thoughts of a corrupted, bloodred
swampland where loathsome things slithered and groveled in the noisome muds.
*

*

*

*

*

They were woken after middens by the arrival of costerman Squarmis, surprisingly delivering
their heavy luggage intact and unmolested. Ox trunks properly stowed at the feet of their cots,
Threnody's extra packages crammed underneath, the two new lighters were set to task. It was
with profound and sinking horror that Rossamünd discovered the very first duty set aside for
them: feed and muck the dogs.
Oh no!
"Ye've done this before, aye?" said Lamplighter-Sergeant Mulch. "And if ye haven't, well... I
suggest ye learn quickly. It's an easy job and a good way to start, so hop to it now." Three was a
familiarly gruff manner in this lamplighter-sergeant, very much like the one they had left behind
at Winstermill and perhaps all the sergeants the Half-Continent over.
"Dogs don't like me so much, Lamplighter-Sergeant," Rossamünd tried forlornly.
"They'll get used to ye," the man insisted, "especially if ye hold them out a little bit o’ food."
"We will do splendidly, Sergeant," Threnody said flatly, and taking Rossamünd under his
arm, pulled him with her down to the kennels.
But they did not do splendidly.
As at Wellnigh House, so it was here. No matter how tasty a morsel Rossamünd held out to
them, the dogs went wild. Threnody's solution of sending him down to close off and muck out
the other end of the cage failed miserably; the dogs bayed and yammered and made such a ruckus
at him that all of Wormstool came running with cries of "Nicker on the doorstep!"
They soon realized what was what. There was no nicker anywhere, not even after a full
quarto of the Stoolers searched the perimeters of the cothouse with Crescens Hugh the lurksman
at their lead.

"I dun't know, mates, it's all cry and no nickers," Hugh declared when the searchers returned
and the front door was secured once more. Everyone professed themselves mystified and the
incident was dismissed.
Lamplighter-Sergeant Mulch just shook his head when all was done and declared, "The dogs
truly don't like ye, do they, lad?"

24
A Lamplighter's Life
combinades hand arms that are a clever combination of mêlée weapon and firelock. The firing mechanism on
most combinades is an improved wheel lock, being more sturdy than a flintlock, and able to take the jars that come
when the weapon is used to strike a foe. Added to this, the lock mechanism, trigger and hammer are usually
protected by gathered bands of metal, a basket much like those protecting the hilts of many foreign swords. When
edges and bullets are treated with gringollsis, combinades become very effective therimoirs (monster-killing tools).

O

n the second day Rossamünd's life as a lamplighter started in full. Now he was properly
arrived in this wild place, he was careful to replenish his bandage with the recent-made Exstinker,
dawdling with his preparations until the other lighters had gone to breakfast. Obeying
instructions, he ventured out fully harnessed, a necessary precaution this close to the monsters'
realm. He quickly discovered the day-watch consisted of little more than rounds of chores,
beginning — navylike — with the scrubbing of all the floors, soap-stoning and swabbing and
flogging every story of the tower as if they were the decks of a ram.
Nothing more was said about the incident with the dogs, though the young lighter was not
required to muck and feed them anymore. Instead he and Threnody helped in the kitchens or in
the Works — as the third floor from the entrance was named, carrying and fetching for Onesimus
Grumely, the house-tinker and sometime proofener, or tending the fortlet's bright-limns and
lanterns with Mister Splinteazel, Seltzerman 2nd Class. Yet Rossamünd soon discovered his
favorite task was to join sentries, watching through the loopholes in the walls or from the
observation benches upon the roof. Dubbed the Fighting Top, it was a place he quickly decided
was the best in the whole cothouse. From there, high and safe, he could marvel at the whole
flatland of the Frugelle with little interruption and still be considered working.
Threnody did not share his enthusiasm for the view. "This is an ugly place," she declaimed
darkly as they watched with Theudas after middens. "All I can see is a hundred nooks for
bufaboos to flourish."
Even as she spoke there came a single flash of lightning far away north, leaping from the flat
cover of cloud straight to the earth. A second distant bolt had Theudas ducking.
"What, by my aching bowels, was that?" the lampsman exclaimed.
The peal of thunder took a long time to reach them, and by then it was only a sullen grumble.
"Maybe Europe has found her rever-man!" Rossamünd stared in the direction of the strike,
heart thumping with fright.
"Maybe," replied Threnody, her tone saying, Who cares!
Threnody's sour misgivings and the regularity of lamp-lighting life soon dulled the novelty of
a new location. A day's beginning was marked by the usual rattle of drums and its end by the cry
"A lamp, A lamp to light your path!" declaring the arrival of the Haltmire lighters — stern, stiff
fellows that the Stoolers called "Limpers." Then, as at Winstermill, was a little time for each daywatchman to do as he pleased before douse-lanterns. However, Rossamünd found the sameness
of each day — as at Winstermill — a real and surprising comfort; for all their overfamiliarity, the
routines were powerfully settling.
Different from the manse, were Domesdays. Out here they were not free of labor; indeed the
lantern-watch had no rest at all. It was a day of reduced work, but House-Major Grystle was of
the opinion that idle hands make waste, and the vigil was make-and-mend day where clothes were
patched and proofing was mended.
Yet in between light Domesday duties and any spare moment of an evening, the Stoolers
enjoyed what Rossamünd soon considered his favorite pastime: sitting in the mess to play at

checkers and the card games of lesquin and pirouette. They conducted themselves with far better
grace and mirth than the prentices and, though the stakes were high, there was no bickering on the
shuffle or squabbling over who could bet what or when. At pirouette — where the winning hand
had the losing hand do a silly dance — they went easy on Rossamünd, letting him learn; but
Threnody they needed to give no such grace. She quickly showed herself a match for all, even
Mister Harlock, the sergeant-master, who proved shrewdly adept at outwitting most of his billetmates. Young Theudas, however, was far too sharp and beat all with great whoops! of victory as
he mercilessly had everyone — even Rossamünd — hopping to one dance or another as they lost
the round.
"Kindly Ladies Watch the Happy Aurangs again!" he declared triumphantly, throwing down
both queens, both duchesses and both aurangs.
Half the success of the game was knowing precisely what made for a winning hand; there was
a long list of combinations, just like the Hundred Rules of Harundo, and Rossamünd was slow to
remember them all. Once again his own hand was pathetically meager, the worst of the round
and now — for the fifth time that night — he was made to gambol about, curling his arms in and
out calling, "I'm a monkey! I'm a monkey!" his face attaining the hue of the red side of his
quabard.
"Go easy on the new babbies," Lamplighter-Sergeant Mulch chuckled while the other
Stoolers guffawed at Rossamünd's antics. Threnody looked on with an expression of almost
feline satisfaction. Mysteriously, Theudas never seemed to trump her, and she had not yet been
made to dance a single turn.
Mulch's well-intentioned interjection only made Theudas more gleefully determined to win,
and Rossamünd was made to turn a jig many more times before he won his first hand. Of all his
billet-mates, Aubergene or Lightbody were perhaps the most unfortunate at cards.
"Ye'd have to be the most losingest two I ever clapped eyes on!" Under-Sergeant Poesides
would laugh almost every night as he watched either unfortunate lighter lope about foolishly as
the winning cards directed. He and all the others — whether Stooler, Bleaker or Limper —
would refuse to play them at the more serious hands of lesquin. Here the spoils of victory were
grog rations and favors; the lowest-valued favor was to stand in for kitchen duties or firelock
cleaning, the value quickly escalating to the ultimate prize: having another take your place to
muck the jakes. Out here sewer-workings were not nearly as sophisticated as at Winstermill, and
the water closets needed frequent flushing with buckets of old dishwater and cleaning with broad,
blunt shovels on long handles — an odious job, the most unpleasant task for the day-watch.
The house-major would play no game of chance against his men — especially not lesquin —
declaring solemnly that "an officer should never take from those under his command nor be seen
to be overborne by them either."
*

*

*

*

*

Near the end of their first week new stores arrived on the back of a long dray that had
lumbered the dangerous Wettin Lowroad up from Hurdling Migh. Rossamünd knew only
vaguely of this city: an isolated settlement — so his peregrinate told him — semi-independent in
its remoteness and filled with a stern yet hospitable people. The driver of the dray and his grimlooking side-armsman were both pale-looking fellows. They had apparently made the northward
journey often, but the threatening rumor of bogle and nicker had forced them to hire a scourge for
protection.
This hireling was called the Scarlet Tarquin. He – she – it – sat stiffly now at the front of the
truck swathed entirely in red fascins, bandaged crown to toe in protective cloth with only two
round lenses protruding at the eyes. Laden with salumanticums, stoups, powder-costers and all
the appurtenances of scolding, the scourge simply watched but did not offer help. Passing the
red-wrapped teratologist as he and Threnody tumbled down the steps to help unload, the young

lighter was affronted by a faint, yet powerfully unpleasant whiff of potent chemistry. He stayed
well clear of this scarlet scourge as he worked.
On the dray were piled crates of musket balls, wayfoods and script parts; butts of rum, wine
and black powder; sacks of flour, cornmeal and dried pease; even three bolts of undyed drill for
making-and-mending day. While two lighters stood at guard on the road, every item was hauled
up by a limber-run sheer on the fourth floor, its winch arm swung out from broad double doors —
the store-port high in Wormstool's wall. Climbing into the dray, Rossamünd helped Theudas and
Poesides shift and tie each load to the sheer cord.
Standing below by the flat truck, the tired and humorless driver was arguing vociferously with
Semple the day-clerk about the excessive charge for service this time.
"Thy wants they goods timely and whole, do thee not?" the driver was saying. "Safe passage
for cargo dern't come cheap nowadays." He glared at the Scarlet Tarquin for emphasis.
Rossamünd did not hear the reply, for Poesides moved away with sudden violence, giving a
great shout: "Watch it lad! The knot's come loose! Load's goin' to fall!" The under-sergeant tied
to grab at him but did not get a grip as he stumbled away.
"Clear out below!" came a sharp cry from the storeport above.
Rossamünd looked up and there hurtling down to crush him was a butt, set free by a poorly
tied knot — a knot he had wound himself. The young lighter hesitated in his fright, stupidly
heedless of his own danger and more concerned with the possible harm to the stores.
"Rossamünd!" Threnody yelped.
Yet he stood transfixed as the heavy barrel dropped on him; instead of leaping aside he caught
the entire weight in his arms with little more than a slight huff! — just as you might catch an
inflated ball. The weight of the load drove him to the truck-top, pinning him on his back. He
held the butt on his chest for several astounded beats before lifting it and setting it carefully back
on the tray, keenly aware of the equally astounded faces all turned to him, even peering in
amazement from the fourth floor.
"Did ye see that?" he heard drift down from above. "Fifty pound of musket shot and he
catched it without a trouble!"
"How'd you do that?" Theudas exclaimed. "That was a full butt of balls! It would have
smashed even Sequecious flat!"
Threnody rushed to the side of the dray-truck and looked up at him. "Rossamünd! Are you
whole?"
"I–I believe so..." was all the young lighter could get out. He tugged at the white solitaire
about his throat, seeking better breath.
"That's enough heavy loading for ye, lad," Poesides declared. "Ye can't depend on freakish
catches all the time in this job. Take a spell inside. Have Mister Tynche or Splinteazle take a
look at ye if ye reckon it necessary. I'll leave ye in the hands of the lass."
Rossamünd obeyed, Threnody helping him up each stairway.
"You should have been pounded to pea-mash by that bullet-barrel," she insisted.
"My chest does hurt, if that's more satisfying," Rossamünd answered wryly.
"Oh, ha-ha." Threnody did not look amused. "You should hardly make a jest of such a horrid
thing. I thought you were done in! Poesides has it right: most certainly a freakish catch."
Talk of his feat buzzed about the cothouse in an instant, and other Stoolers popped their heads
out from nooks to send funny looks his way.
Safely deposited on his bunk, Rossamünd took off his proofed-silk sash and his quabard to
relieve the bruised tenderness in his ribs.
"What is that about your chest?" Threnody asked, crouching by him and looking at the loose
collar of his shirt.
Rossamünd's innards almost burst open with fright. "h no, my Exstinker bandage! "It's– it's–
it's... it's for putting on nullodor," he tried.

"What, the one that Critchety-crotchety ledgermain fellow made you?" the girl lighter
questioned.
Frowning, Rossamünd nodded.
"You don't use it, do you?" Threnody snorted.
His frown deepening, he nodded once more.
"When? Even out unloading carts?"
"Aye!" Rossamünd hissed in exasperation. "All the time! It was a command of my old
masters back at the foundlingery."
"Aren't you the obedient little munkler, then?" Threnody looked narrowly at him. She turned
and left him to recover alone.
*

*

*

*

*

Later in the day, when goods were safely stowed and the dray left, returning to Bleakhall and
then home, presumably to Hurdling Migh, Rossamünd was called to House-Major Grystle's desk.
"What is this that I hear of: you snatching falling loads as if they were light parcels?" the
house-major queried.
"I couldn't well have let it fall to crash, sir." Rossamünd was a little baffled by the fuss made
of his fortunate grab.
Grystle gave a baffled blink of his own. "No, I suppose you couldn't have at that." He dusted
a fleck off his pristine sleeve. "A powerful fine catch either way, Lampsman. I did not know
they raised you so strong in Boschenberg — the lords at the Mill would be well advised to
prentice more of your countrymen."
"Aye, sir."
"Maybe we should make you our fellow to challenge those stuffy Limpers to a wrench-ofarms?" The house-major gave a kindly smile.
Rossamünd did not really know what his superior was talking about. "Maybe, sir" was all he
could think to say.
After a clumsy pause that grew into an uncomfortable silence, Rossamünd was dismissed.
Quizzical eyes were on him all that night at mains, the story growing some in its retelling.
Aubergene asked him how he was feeling after catching half the load of the dray.
"It was really just one butt, nothing more," Rossamünd explained.
"Aye, but I heard it was a very full one."
Rossamünd shrugged.
Fortunately the incident quickly receded into the routine. Not more than two days later he
was able to enter a room without there being that strange, deliberate silence. It was not
completely forgotten, however, for it earned Rossamünd a new name: “The Great Harold” they
began it call him, or “Master Haroldus,” after the hero of the Battle of the Gates. Not even in the
face of the awe of the prentices when he killed the gudgeon had Rossamünd ever felt so
complimented. He had been given a new name — a proper military nickname — and the quiet,
hidden joy of it had him smiling himself to sleep for the rest of the week.
"I thought Harold was a skold," was all Threnody said in quibble one breakfast.
"Aye, he was," Aubergene answered her, from across the bench, "but he was a dead-mighty
one."
Thankfully, she did not say any more to spoil Rossamünd's delight, nor did she venture
another word about the barrel or his Exstinker bandage.
*

*

*

*

*

Proving to have suffered no permanent discomfort from his catching feat, Rossamünd was
soon employed in his very first excursion away from the cothouse. On the opening day of the

second week he was sent with Poesides, Aubergene and Lightbody to carry stores to a poor old
eeker-woman — an exile who had fled across the Ichormeer from somewhere east. Rossamünd
was astounded that lighters would seek to aid one of the under class, a reject of her own society
and unwanted in the Empire as well.
"Ah! Master Haroldus has come to lend us his mighty hands!" Poesides said in kindly jest as
hey readied to leave.
The other lighters smiled warmly in response as Rossamünd ducked his head to hide his
delight.
The necessary stores — foodstuffs, clothing, repellents, a small quantity of black powder and
balls — were lifted onto their backs and they departed, Whelpmoon observing them blearily as
they filed out the heavy front door and down the narrow steps. Cold was the morning, its soft
breath stinging cheeks, the eastern horizon orange-pink with the sun's rising.
"Where are we going to? Rossamünd asked Aubergene quietly as they crossed the road and
stood on its northern verge.
The lighter adjusted his grip on the long-rifle he bore. "There's a small seigh out north near
the banks of the Frugal where an old dame lives. Mama Lieger is her name. The bee's buzz is hat
she likes to talk to the bogles and that's why she lives far out here — fled from Wörms to escape
accusing tongues.
"Aye, and now we're the sorry sods who ‘ave to do ‘er deliveries," interjected Lightbody.
"I've ‘eard it she was some wild strig-woman when she was younger, coming from one of them
irritable troupes of wild folk from the Geikélund out back of Wörms."
"Didn't the folks where she's from try to hang her?" Rossamünd had a vision of the uneasy
destructress with flashing blades and flying hair having monsters around for supper.
"I reckon she must have got away afore they could." Aubergene smiled.
Rossamünd shifted the uncomfortable load and stared a little suspiciously at the uneasy
threwd that brooded out beyond the road-edge. "Why doesn't she have Squarmis the costerman
do the delivering?"
"‘Cause that filthy salt-horse won't take things to the likes of her," answered Poesides, "and
she could ne'er afford him to if ever he did. No, lad, it is our honor to take these supplies to her.
She bain't the only eeker to get our help: it's the lighters' way out here, to succor all kinds in need
without fault-findin'." He gave an acerbic sideways look at Lightbody.
"But isn't she a sedorner?" Rossamünd pressed, feeling a glimmer of hope. "I thought lighters
would have said all sedorners were bad folk and done them in somehow."
"A lamp's worth is proved by its color, lad." The under-sergeant gave him a curious look.
"Mama Lieger has done good for us, so we do for her benefit as she has done for ours... and
maybe — if she does hold conversationals with the local hobs — she might put in a good word
for us with them. But just have yer intellectuals about ye, else she'll have ye believing that some
monsters are not so bad after all."
"Aye..." Aubergene muttered, "though some might agree with her on that one."
Almost stumbling down the side of the highroad, Rossamünd looked in surprise at the
lampsman, a dawning of respect rising in his bosom.
"Stopper that talk, Lampsman!" Poesides barked. "Her saying such things is one bend of a
crook, but ye spratting on so is a whole other. I don't want to have to leave ye with the old gel
when we get to her house."
Aubergene ducked his head. "Aye, Under-Sergeant," he murmured.
Poesides fixed Rossamünd with a commanding eye. "We're all about quiet when walking off
the road, so silence them questions for now."
The youngest lighter obeyed and said naught as the under-sergeant traveled an unmarked path
through the thick lanes and thickets of thistle and cold-stunted olive and tea trees. In single file
the three followed after, walking as carefully as they could without going too slow. The shaley
soil clinked softly as their boots broke the damp, fog-dampened surface, to reveal the earth

beneath still dry and dusty. This was indeed a parched place, yet life still flourished, making the
most of what little moisture it gleaned from the damp southern airs.
Always searching left and right, all four kept eyes and ears sharp for signs of monsters. Tiny
birds chased on either side of them, flitting rapidly through the thick twine of thorny, twiggy
branches, rarely showing themselves but for a flash of bright sky blue or fiery, black-speckled
red. Rossamünd wanted to stop, to be still for a time and breathe in the woody smells and quietly
observe the nervous flutterers, but on they marched, pausing only for a brief breather and a suck
of small beer.
Two miles out from the Wormway the difficult country opened out a little and began to gently
decline, a broad view of the Frugal vale before them, gray, thorny, patched with dark spinneys of
squat, parched trees. Aubergene and Lightbody moved to walk on either side of Poesides. Keen
to prove himself a worthy, savvy lighter Rossamünd did the same, stepping straight into a spider's
web strung between two man-high thistles and still glistening with dew in the advancing morning.
"Ack!" he spluttered and scrabbled at the stickiness on his face, terrified some little crawler
might be about to sink fangs into his nose or crawl and nest in his hair.
"Hold your crook in front of your face," Aubergene offered in a hush, clasping his long-rifle
vertically in front of him in example. "Catches the webs and keeps your dial safe of them."
There was not a glimpse or hint of a single monster the whole way, yet the land still heeded
them and knew they walked where men seldom did our should. Choughs scooted away with a
flash of their white tail feathers at the lighters' advance through the cold land, looping low
through the stunted swamp oaks, letting out their clear calls: a single note bright yet mournful,
ringing across the flats. As the day-orb reached the height of its meridian Rossamünd spied a
high-house — a seigh — very much as those eeker-houses he saw from the Gainway down to
High Vesting. This one looked older, though — very much as if it belonged here, grown
somehow rather than built by human action; a sagging pile hidden behind a patch of crooked,
fragrant swamp oaks. Its too-tall chimneys looked near ready to topple; its roof was entirely
submerged in yellow lichens; weedy straw grew from every crevice in the lower footings. In this
place the threwd was different somehow, so gentle and insinuating that Rossamünd hardly
perceived it; the watchfulness was not so hostile — indeed, it was almost welcoming.
Rossamünd might have liked to stay here. He looked pensively up at the high-house.
There was no stair to the gray-weathered door nearly twenty feet above.
Poesides took Rossamünd's fodicar from him. "We really must get ye a right lengthened
crook," he muttered. Hefting it up, the under-sergeant deftly hooked a cloth-covered chain
hanging well above their heads from the wall by the door. He gave it a series of deliberate tugs
and waited.
Aubergene and Lightbody kept watch at their backs.
There was only a brief wait before the lofty door opened with a clunk and a small head
peeped without.
"Ah-hah, das güt aufheitermen!" Rossamünd seemed to hear, a soft woman's voice speaking
incomprehensibly in what he could only presume — from his prenticing with Lampsman
Puttinger — was Gott. "Guten Tag, happy fellows!" the voice called a little louder in
Brandenard.
"Mother Lieger!" Poesides gave a hoarse cry, trying to be heard without making noise. "We
have yer stores."
"Güt, güt," and the head disappeared. What had appeared like a small, moldering eave over
the door shuddered and, with a click, began to drop smoothly to the ground, lowered on thick
cord.
It was an elevator. They were rare in Boschenberg and, no matter how simple this device
was, out in the wilds was the last place Rossamünd expected to find one.
Each lighter was raised up on this small, worn platform. Poesides went first, and as the
smallest Rossamünd was sent up next, finding the elevator more stable than it first appeared. He

had no notion how Mama Lieger might operate this device if ever she left the house, but this
pondering did not occupy his mind long. At the top he found a tiny front room — the obverse —
with loopholes in the back wall and another solid door too, which was currently open. The
woman was not there, though domestic bustle was coming from some rearward room.
Rossamünd waited as the under-sergeant worked the mechanism that raised the platform. All
present, Poesides led them through the second door to carefully deposit their burdens in a small
closet at the end of a short, white hall.
"Ahh," came that soft female voice, getting louder as the speaker appeared from a side door.
"I must be thanking you once again for keeping a poor old einsiedlerin's pantry full."
Bearing a tray of opaque white glasses, Mama Lieger turned out to be a neat, rather dumpy
old lady, silvery tresses arranged in a precise bun, neither too tight nor too relaxed. Her homely
clothes of shawl, stomacher-dress and apron were sensibly simple as was the interior of her
humble dwelling. Run-down as it was, the parlor into which the men were invited was clean and
tidy, any drafty holes plugged with unused flour bags neatly rolled and wedged into the gaps. Yet
for all this orderly homeliness there remained in her puddingy features evidence of the sharp,
hawklike face she would have once possessed and a disquieting keen and untamed twinkle in her
penetrating gaze — something deeply aware and utterly irrepressible. Serving them the piping,
sharply spiced saloop the old eeker-woman looked Rossamünd over hat-brim to boot-toe. "Who
is this new one, then?" she smiled, her expression most definitely hawkish. "Do they make
lighters in half sizes now, yes? To take up less room in your festung — your fortress — yes?"
Poesides and the lampsmen gave a hearty chuckle.
"I—" Rossamünd fumbled for a proper response.
As she passed a drink to him, the young lighter noticed the hint of a dark brown swirl
insinuating out from under the eeker-woman's long sleeve, its style and color looking so very like
a monster-blood tattoo. Rossamünd nearly missed his grip on the cup of saloop.
Mama Lieger noticed him noticing her marks and peered at him closely. "What a one you
have brought me, Poesides." The neat old lady's wild, black eyes gleamed disconcertingly. "It is
so very clear this one has seen his tale of ungerhaur; have you not, my little enkle, yes? Poor
young fellow, I see the touch on him — I see he bears the burden of seeing like Mama Lieger
sees, of thinking like she thinks, yes?"
Is she calling me a sedorner too? Rossamünd looked nervously from her to his billet-mates:
he did not relish being ostracized so early in his posting.
"Aye, aye, Mama." The under-sergeant came to his rescue. "Ye'd have everyone lost in the
outramour if ye could," he said tightly.
"That I would and the better for the world if you all were. Not to matter, you stay out here for
a long time and the land will quietly speak to you — mutter mutter — the schrecken — the
threwd — changing your mind: is that not right, my little enkle?" She peered at Rossamünd once
more.
"I– ah—" How can she talk such dangerous words so freely? He wondered at the mild
expressions of his fellow lampsmen, sipping tentatively at their piquant saloop and trying not to
show how unpleasant they found it. Why doesn't Poesides damn her as a vile traitor and have her
hanged from the nearest tree? These fellows weren't mindless invidists — monster-haters — not
at all. Rossamünd did not know what to think of them.
Apparently heedless, Mama Lieger sat in a soft highbacked chair and engaged the older
fellows in a simple chatter for a time, yet here shrewd attention constantly flickered over to
Rossamünd.
Uncomfortable, Rossamünd looked at the mantel above the cheerily crackling fire. There he
spied a strange-looking doll, a grinning little mannish-shaped thing with a big head and small
body made entirely of bark and tufts of old grass. Even as he looked at it the smile seemed to
expand more cheekily and, for a sinking beat, Rossamünd was sure he saw an eye open — a deep
yellow eye that reminded him ever so much of Freckle.

The eye gave him a wink.
Rossamünd jerked in fright, spilling a little of his saloop.
All other eyes turned on him.
"Ye got the horrors, Lampsman?" Poesides asked in his most authoritative voice, a hint of
disapproval in his eyes, as if Rossamünd's behavior was a shame to the lighters.
"I—" was all Rossamünd could say for a moment. He gripped his startled thoughts and chose
better words. "I have not, Under-Sergeant, I–I was startled by that ugly little doll," he finished
weakly.
"An ugly doll." Poesides looked less than pleased.
Mama Lieger stood spryly. "He is never ugly!" she insisted, rising to stand by the wizened
little thing. "My little holly-hop man. He is just sleeping his little sleeping-head." She patted the
rugged thing with a motherly "coo," and turned a knowing look on Rossamünd.
He could not believe she was being so bold, nor that his fellows did not seem overly
perturbed. Rossamünd looked fixedly into his glass of saloop and did not look up again till they
were shuffling out of the room to leave. It was a relief to be going, despite the friendly threwd.
The four made a hasty journey in the needling cold, Rossamünd as eager as the other to be home,
back to the familiarity of the cothouse, their path easier for the lightening of their backs. He was
glad too for the enforced silence to stopper his questioning mouth and for the distraction of the
threwd growing less friendly again to occupy his thoughts. With Wormstool clearly in sight, a
dark, stumpy stone finger protruding high upon the flatland, Aubergene dared a quiet question.
"What were you getting all spooked at with that unlighterly display in front of the Mama,
Rossamünd?"
Rossamünd flushed with shame. "That — that holly-hop doll moved, Aubergene," he hissed.
"It winked and grinned at me!" he added at the other lighter's incredulous look.
"You're a dead-strange one, Lampsman Bookchild." Aubergene gave a grin of his own.
"Maybe Mama Lieger is right and you can see like she sees?" He scratched his cheek with an
open palm. "I've sure seen the dead-strangest occurrences since being out here; changes the way
you think, it does. Perhaps you can put in a good word to the monsters for us too, ‘ey?"
Rossamünd's guts griped. Was the man being serious? Yet Aubergene's grin was wry and
teasing and Rossamünd grinned foolishly in return.
"Hush it the brace of ye!" Poesides growled. "Ye knows better..."
Of one thing Rossamünd was becoming more certain: he was quickly growing to like these
proud, hardworking, simple-living lighters. He could begin to imagine a lamplighter's life out
here with them.
*

*

*

*

*

During their third week and an endless round of chores, Europe stopped by Wormstool,
accompanied by a lampsman from Bleakhall as her hired lurksman. She had managed to
persuade his superiors to release him to aid in her vital task of keeping the Paucitine safe — that
was how she told it at least. Thoroughly impressed to be meeting the Branden Rose, the Stoolers
joked with their Bleaker chum, declaring him the most fortunate naught-good box-sniffer in all
the Idlewild.
"Bye, and I'm earnin' more a day than ye all do in a month," he bragged.
Europe ignored them as she spoke briefly with Rossamünd.
"Did you catch the rever-man?" was almost the first thing he said to her. "Was that your
lightning we saw last week?"
"It might well have been. The basket was well knit and required a little more — push, shall
we say. I never found out where it came from, though. Tell me," she said, changing the subject,
"are you happily established in this tottering fortlet?"

"Aye, happily enough," Rossamünd answered. He wondered how he might fare trying to
persuade Europe to hunt only rever-men. Probably not well, he concluded, and asked
conversationally, "Have you been to the Ichormeer yet?"
"No." Europe frowned quizzically. "There is no call to go picking fights one does not need."
Threnody had come down to the mess but caught one glimpse of the fulgar, and with a polite
grimace and a forced "How-do-you-do" went straight back up to wherever she had come from.
"How is our new-carved miss finding the full-fledged lighting life?" Europe asked amusedly.
Rossamünd watched Threnody's petulant retreat. "I think she might be sorry for leaving
Herbroulesse."
Europe clucked her tongue. "The appeal of an adventurous life seldom lasts in the bosom of a
peer's pampered daughter."
Rossamünd was not sure if the fulgar was talking about Threnody or herself.
"Tell me, Rossamünd, have you received any replies to your letters?"
It took a beat or two for the young lighter to realize she was talking of his controversial
missives to Sebastipole and the good doctor. All the worry for Winstermill and Numps returned
in a flood. "No," he answered simply. What else to say?
Europe's eyes narrowed. "Hmm."
"What can it mean?" Rossamünd was suddenly afraid that he had done the wrong thing in
sending them.
"Nothing," Europe offered, her voice distant. "Everything. It probably simply indicates that
your correspondents are too busy with their own affairs and, more so, that there is little they can
do and little to be said as a result."
"Oh." His soul sank then lifted angrily. "There are times in the small hours I want to board a
po‘lent and hurry back to face Swill myself. I beat his rever-man and I can beat him too!
"I am sure you can, little man," Europe chuckled, "should you get that close... Keep at your
work here, Rossamünd. Let the rope run out — they will eventually choke on deeds of their own
invention. Such are the bitter turnings of Imperial politics: you have to endure much ill before
you prevail. Pugnating the nicker is a much simpler life... and you live longer too," she finished
with a smirk.
After an exchange of respectful greetings with House-Major Grystle, Europe was soon on her
way again, hired lamplighter lurksman in tow.
"I go to Haltmire now, to solve problems for the Warden-General," she declared in farewell,
adding quietly to Rossamünd, "It should prove to be an intriguing venture — I hear some distant
grief has quite soured the Warden's intellectuals. So wish me well."
"Do well," Rossamünd answered anxiously.
Her departure left a hint of bismuth and something for the lighters to talk about on the boring
watches long after.
*

*

*

*

*

As for Threnody, the lamplighters of Wormstool themselves had scant clue how to live with a
female in their number. Regardless they proved proud of her all the same. ‘Our little wit-girl‘
they called her, and would ‘ma'am’ her wherever she went in the cothouse. They would grow shy
when she descended to the well in the cellars to do her toilet, and some even doted a little, going
to some lengths to make sure she had ample supply of parts for her plaudamentum and other
treacles. At every change of watch, when the Haltmire lighters would arrive, the Stoolers would
boast that they were better than their Limper chums, "‘cause we have a wit!" That there were no
others amazed Rossamünd. He had assumed lahzars would be standard issue on this leg of the
Wormway, yet there were only two skolds at Haltmire and nothing better than a dispensurist at
the four cothouses.

Clearly enjoying it, Threnody quickly grew comfortable with the attention. She took to
wearing a pair of fine-looking doglocks in equally fine holsters at her hips, bearing them
everywhere and playing the part of pistoleer at last.
"Where did you get those? " Rossamünd inquired one middens.
"Beautiful pieces, aren't they?" the girl beamed.
He had to agree: they were indeed attractive, made of black wood and silver, every metal part
engraved with the most delicate floral filigree, elegant weapons despite their heavy bore.
"Do you remember the prolonged stop we made at Hinkerseigh?"
"Aye." He recalled most of all that she had made them wait.
"These were why I was gone. I purchased them from Messrs. Lard & Wratch of Chortle
Lane, finest gunsmiths in the Placidine." Her beam widened. "I have longed for them for so
long, looking in on them any time we made an excursion to that town."
"How much did they cost?" he whispered. "How did you afford them?"
Threnody's smile vanished. "Don't you know that you never ask a woman how much
anything costs!" she declaimed.
Rossamünd was sure that any regrets she might have had for coming to Wormstool were
cured.
*

*

*

*

*

A common practice of a dousing lantern-watch was to leave the first two great-lamps on their
route still undoused. These morning lights were left glowing to provide a little light to the
surrounds of the cothouse while the sun still tarried on the lip of the world. Part of this practice
involved members of the day- or house-watch then going out and dousing them when the dayshine was brighter.
On Gallowsnight Eve, with every vertical protrusion in Wormstool hung with toy nooses of
string and slight rope and neckerchiefs to herald this ghoulish festivity, Rossamünd and Threnody
were sent to douse the morning-lights. They did this under the eagerly watching eye of Theudas
— eagerly watching, that is, of Threnody. He was only slightly less recently joined to Wormstool
than they and could not be happier for it, now that this dark-haired peerlet had arrived. At the
base of East Worm 1 West Halt 52 Threnody and Theudas swapped a little chatter while they let
Rossamünd struggle to douse the lamp.
"So how is old Grind-yer-bones?" Theudas inquired. "Still grinding away on all the poor
prentices?"
"I can tell you," answered Threnody, "that he was none too happy about us being sent out so
soon. Went into apoplexies arguing with the Master-of-Clerks."
"Ahh, dear old Grind-yer-bones, he's an awkward basket." Theudas shook his head. "The
kind ye want on yer side in a fight. We always reckoned he ate spent musket balls for his
breakfast as the only things that might satisfy his stomach of a morning."
Clang! Rossamünd took another swing at the ratchet and missed. The other two seemed
more than content to simply watch as he failed.
"Here, let me help you, Rossamünd," Threnody piped, going over to him. "He has never been
much good at crook work," she said motheringly over her shoulder. "I've had to help him with
the winding before."
"Is that the truth, Master Haroldus?" asked Theudas with an incredulous laugh.
"Just the once," Rossamünd muttered angrily.
"Little wonder then ol' Grind-yer-bones was so reluctant to ever let you out," marveled
Theudas. "Whoever heard of a lighter who couldn't light?"
Threnody gave a short braying laugh but saw Rossamünd's face and became serious. "He can
throw a good potive though," she offered.

"All I need is a proper length crook!" Rossamünd growled as he tried again. With a belated
clink he got the crank-hook home in the ratchet slot and with angry jerks began to wind in the
bloom.

25
Thickets And Thrumcops
thrumcop also called a bog-button and related to a larger, tasty and oddly threwdish fungus known as austerpill,
thrumcops are a funguslike mushroom with a deep brown pileus spotted with swollen off-white circular patches. The
essence of thrumcops can be used in rudimentary repellents, giving rise to the idea that eating them on their own will
cause this essence to seep through your pores and make you less appetizing to a monster.

T

he restless airs of the Frugelle were rarely still, winds ever blowing from the lower
cardinals. If they came from the west they smelled of parched rock and hinted too of fennel and
loam; if from the south they brought with them a tang of the ocean deeps; but from the east the
winds' cold breathing carried the sick stink of rot and fire-damp — the portentous, threwdish reek
of the Ichormeer. It was on one of these putrid easterly days, with the sky lowering and
threatening gales, that Rossamünd and Threnody were set the task of joining Sequecious the
Sebastian cook to find more thrumcops to store for more breakfasts. House-Major Grystle
showed great concern for their safety, handing over a portable timepiece to Rossamünd. "Take
this hack-watch, Lampsman," the man added, "and be gone no more than three quarters of one
hour. Just a brief search and back here again. Someone will be watching from the roof, and if
you are in distress, send up a flare."
"Aye, sir." Rossamünd cradled the remarkable device for an awed moment then hid it as
safely as he could on his person. He was given charge too of a tubelike flammagon — a flintlock
flare-thrower, which he hung from his shoulder along with his salumanticum.
Still in his kitchen apron and wearing a broad-brimmed catillium to cover his bald pate from
the pale glare of the clouds, Sequecious the cook carried with him a large cauldron. This pot was
of such girth that another man might have struggled to carry it in both arms, yet the fellow
dangled it in the crook of one powerful, flabby arm. In the other, Sequecious bore a boltarde with
pistol-length wheel locks extending from the pole on either side of the axlike blades. The blade
edges were patterned with a distinctive spatter of congealed black; the telltale spackle of a
weapon smeared with aspis, one of the more effective venificants or distinct monster poisons.
Like so many of the firelocks and hand arms of the Wormstool lighters, it was not prescribed
issue. These fellows may have behaved in an exemplary manner and kept their harness to a
higher-than-drill-book standard, yet their personal weapons were as diverse as the personalities
who wielded them. Perhaps Rossamünd's favorite was an ax-carabine belonging to Aubergene,
with its wooden butt thinned to a handle — the stock and barrel not much longer than that of a
pistol — and the muzzle fixed with a thin, silver-crescent ax-head counterbalanced by a warhammer fluke. It was an elegant piece, and Lampsman Aubergene was clearly proud of it.
With many grins and some wordless gestures Sequecious got the two young lighters to follow
him; Threnody regarding every request with scorn but obedient nevertheless.
Standing on the edge of the highroad facing north, the cook pointed to a thick stand of regal
swamp oaks away to the northeast, about two hundred yards into the flatland. "Thrumcops are
being best found in there, tank yee," he said with a happy nod. The tallest and largest of the few
copses and thickets that dotted the otherwise unrelieved flatness of the land, it was as close to the
Frugelle came to a forest. Despite all the warnings and suspicions of threwd, Rossamünd was
eager to explore the somber wood.
In a spray of dust and stones, they slid down the short, steep side of the road, the cook almost
upending himself in his career. He laughed the near-miss away and led them off into the weird
world of the Paucitine flats. Semidried stands of mustard weed and thistles thrice Rossamünd's

height made lanes through the small, tough grasses. These lanes would run for seven or eight
yards before another lane would cross it and block the way, making a weedy maze that was hard
to contradict. Sequecious waddled confidently along a stubbly, stony route that would have had
Rossamünd disoriented but for the glimpses he caught of Wormstool. The fortalice was a
conspicuous landmark in this vast, remote cosmos. The Imperial Spandarion flicked and cracked
on high from the rooftop, as the lampsmen's washing strung out beneath whipped in unison.
There must have been water about, despite the arid soil and thirsty plants, for as they walked
the young lighter could hear frogs croaking, creaking and ponging at every hand, it might have
been a friendly chorus, but the uneasy feeling of threwd, amplified by the fetid eastern breeze,
turned the amphibious music sinister. Sometimes they would stop, leaving an eerie hush that set
Rossamünd anxiously searching for a lurker.
Untroubled, Sequecious pushed effortlessly through a thicket and the young lighters followed
in the wake the great man's girth made, unhindered by stem or twig. They were in the stand of
swamp oaks at last, a dim grove that soughed uneasily in the wind.
Clearly pooped by the effort of the short walk, the cook puffed, "Yee find out yonder, boyo,"
pointing to the farthest end of the modest wood. "An’ yee, girly, go between." He indicated the
middle ground to an unhappy-looking Threnody. "I am being right hereabouts. Look in between
th’ roots an’ under the leaves an’ be putting thrumcops in these an’ I bring them back to pot when
full, tank yee," he concluded, giving the two an old post-bag each.
Barely comprehending the cook's odd talk but following his intention, Rossamünd went to his
designated end of the trees, his footfalls gritty on the dry, spongy mat of needles that kept the
thicket floor clear of weeds and other choking grasses. Threnody walked a little ahead of him.
He could hear her muttering, "I've been in the hands of the best sectifactors in the land and they
have me out here looking for toadstools." Without another word she turned aside at an arbitrary
place and began looking about the ground with little conviction, toeing here and there among
roots.
Rossamünd moved deeper into the grove.
Wings whirring, a sparrow alighted suddenly on an overarching branch. With a sharp turn in
his innards, Rossamünd had the odd, almost threwdish sense that this was the same bird that had
flown up to the doorsill of the carriage when the post-lentum was waiting at Cothallow. He
stopped, hands on hips, and stared at the remarkable, persistent bird, which swiveled its head,
observing him cannily in return.
"Hallo," Rossamünd said softly, "has the Sparrowling sent you?"
The sparrow chirruped loudly.
Was that a reply?
The tiny bird chirped again and shot away, Rossamünd losing sight of it in the thick foliage.
Cautiously he followed its path until he came to a small dell whose entire opposite flank was
overrun by a large boxthorn crowding the roots of several tall swamp oaks. A loud chattering
sparrow song sang from within.
Rossamünd froze, looking left, looking right, but nothing untoward appeared. He glanced
behind and could just make out the massive white bulk of Sequecious clambering about the
farther end of the woods. Threnody was not visible, though Rossamünd thought he could hear her
foraging a short way off. Keeping an eye out, he crouched on his haunches and began to carefully
poke and rake among the needles and dry soil along the lip of the dell, prospecting for the round
fungus with distinct white spots. Somewhere in the treetops, doves softly cooed... cuh-coo-hoooo, cuh-coo-hoo-oo... in the hissing quiet. Becoming engrossed in the search, Rossamünd worked
his way from tree to tree, half filling his bag in quick time. It was only very gradually that he
became alert to creeping movements nearby, a sound different from the constant sussurus of the
needle-leaves, a sly stepping on needly ground. He first thought it was Threnody, but the subtle
sounds were from the entirely opposite direction. Without putting down his sack, the young
lighter eased his free hand into his salumanticum.

A dark shape sneaked into view, creeping around the side of the boxthorn, a small figure,
mottled and unexpectedly familiar... Was it? Surely not! It couldn't be... Yet it was! Shuffling
on the opposite side of the small dell was Freckle. There before him was the glamgorn who had
comforted him in the hold of the Hogshead, one hundred and fifty miles and over two months
away. For a shocked breath they simply looked at each other.
"Freckle?" Rossamünd hissed, remembering himself and looking quickly about, too startled to
fuss with greetings. "You can't be here! There's half a platoon of lighters in that cothouse back
there." He pointed over his shoulder at the shadowy tower. "Many of them, watching us!"
"No, no, no, little once-weepy Rossamünd, it is you that cannot stay, and stay you can't," the
little fellow said musically, hopping from one foot to the other, deep yellow eyes catching the
meager, dappled light brilliantly. These eyes were limpid and anxious-wide, and Freckle's
cheeky, once-happy face was now drawn with worry and fatigue. "Not here. Not with these
people who don't know yet what they ought never to know. I have come and you must get away
with me."
"What do...? But how..."" Rossamünd wanted to dash over and hug Freckle, but this would
be the action of an outramorine — the worst kind of sedorner. Indeed, Freckle himself proved
keen to keep a little space between them.
"I kept a good long look and I saw you and I followed you and I waited," the little barkyskinned bogle said quick and low, "and sometimes Cinnamon would do the following and the
waiting for this one while I went on other ways."
Cinnamon has been watching too? Rossamünd could not quite fathom what he was hearing.
"I have watched you learning all the dividing, conquering ways with your friends who would
not be friends if they knew. Come along now, now come along," Freckle said, waving his hand.
"You saved me so I save you. The Sparrowling will have you and keep you, just as he ought.
You belong nowhere, but it is safer for you to be with him. He—"
"Rossamünd?" came a soft, too-familiar voice. "Wh— what are you doing with that — that
thing?"
Threnody! "Ah — I —" He looked back. There she was, picking through the underbrush,
looking deeply anxious. She was staring with stark intensity at Freckle, and even as she came, the
girl pout her hand to her forehead.
"Threnody, NO!" Rossamünd cried and was instantly overwhelmed with her ill-practiced
scathing, which drove him to his hands and knees. "Threnody... no..." Gritting teeth, Rossamünd
forced himself to clarity, growling under his breath as he struggle to sit and reach into his
salumanticum for something to — to stop Threnody from hurting Freckle! — but it did not
matter, for the clever little glamgorn was already clean away. Threnody sprang after it, sending
again, running wildly past the boxthorn and into the net of low branches through which Freckle
had first come. Her hat was sent flying as she crashed through the growth, falling at Rossamünd's
feet. He heard her flailing about fruitlessly, feeling the frequent edges of her scantly managed
witting.
Rossamünd had seen Freckle avoid a fulgar, and now the glamgorn had eluded a wit — albeit
an unskilled one.
Forcing himself back through the thickly interleaved branches Threnody returned, the
clinging stems tangling with her hair. With a prolonged and angry grunt she pushed clear, yet
something remained behind: her lustrous black curls. They were now a knotted mass weighing
down several snaring twigs. For an awful breath Rossamünd thought the wicked undergrowth
had wrenched her hair from her very scalp. With another shock he realized it was actually a wig.
She had lost her hair from witting after all.
The girl stood in the clearing, blinking and pale, caught in a confustion of shame and fear and
doggedness, her now bald head part hidden beneath white bindings.
"Haven't you ever seen a wit without her hair before?" she said darkly as she snatched her wig
back from the twiggy snare, bringing most of it with her.

Utterly astonished and perplexed, Rossamünd said nothing.
Sequecious came rolling over, rubicund face dribbling sweat.
"What is being yee problems?" he huffed, then puffed, "No yelling or crying, tank yee!
Come! We must be to going back at castle," which was his term for Wormstool. "Yee noises
make for th’ unerhaur to come!"
For the short walk back to the cothouse Threnody remained tight-lipped, fidgeting with her
wig, unable to set it right without a looking glass. "If mother had let me be a pistoleer..."
Rossamünd heard her mutter, "and not made me into a stupid hair-losing neuroticrith!"
The achieved the safety of the cothouse unharmed. Hands on head, Threnody fled to her cot.
Down in the cellar, Rossamünd washed himself, expecting some angry observer to hurry down
and haul him before the house-major as a monster-loving outramorine. Required in the commonmess, he went as quietly as he might. Despite his fears there was not one comment; no one
grabbed him and cried "Sedorner!" as he shuffled past the observers on the entry floor.
Shamefaced and with his head down, he returned the hack-watch to the house-major. Grystle said
naught, while Semple the day-clerk simply gave Rossamünd a firm, gentlemanly nod — a
greeting and nothing more. No one saw me with Freckle! They do not know? Rossamünd could
not decide which was the stronger emotion: his guilt or his relief.
In the common-mess he and Threnody came back together and were set to cleaning the
thrumcops: sitting at the trestle, lopping the stubby stalks just above the ring, rubbing dirt from
the spotty caps.
Vanity restored, Threnody refused to look at Rossamünd.
"The’ good in these here," Sequecious chuckled, holding up a thrumcop, "is these are being
making us uneatable to the ungerhaur. Gets in tha sweats and so we tastes too bad. Very very
good, tank yee."
Rossamünd nodded, scarcely following the cook's monologue, wrinkling his nose at the offsmelling fungus. I don't blame them.
Sequecious rolled out of earshot.
"What were you doing with that blighted bugaboo today?" Threnody whispered in a passion.
"You had your salt-bag — you could have fought it. Instead I find you talking to it?"
"I—I was..." Rossamünd had been caught and there was nothing to do but admit it.
"Tell me, what in the Sundergird were you doing with it?" Threnody pressed. "Swapping
potive recipes? Bogles are for slaying or driving away, not chitter-chatter! I did not get it, and
now the little blightling will be off to murder someone's chickens — or worse!"
"Not every bogle is a ravening gnasher, Threnody, deserving nothing but a hasty death — and
certainly not Freckle! He helped me—"
"That's the talk of a sedorner, Rossamünd! Watch your words," Threnody seethed under her
breath, looking to Sequecious obliviously chopping at something in the kitchen proper. "I cannot
believe you actually know the wretched thing's name."
"I'm not a sedorner just because I can see that not all monsters are bad," Rossamünd
countered quietly but hotly. "Else you could accuse me a murderer just for saying that not all
folks are good!"
"Ugh, lamp boy!" The girl rolled her eyes. "You sound more like Dolours every time we
talk! You should have been an eeker, not a lamplighter. You're most fortunate the cook did not
spy what was what, or someone else on sentries for that matter. If you meet the thing again, get
rid of it! "
"I will not!"
Threnody looked at him with slit-eyed scorn. "To be hung on a Catherine wheel is a bad way
to end," she warned.
"How is it a good end to murder a friend?"
"You just don't understand, do you, lamp boy? Well at least you can trust me to keep this
between you, me and the rising moon."

Rossamünd did not answer. He was happy he did not understand and if understanding meant
slaughtering every bogle in sight, he never wanted to either.
They worked on in angry silence.
*

*

*

*

*

Between the guilt over the accidental tryst with Freckle and the regret for his falling-out with
Threnody, Rossamünd kept to himself that night. Instead of joining his fellows in the gap
between the Limpers' arrival and douse-lanterns for games of checkers and lesquin and tots of
grog, he sat on his cot and wrote a letter to Fransitart. Dating it the fifth of Herse, he described
his safe arrival, gave his new address and sent his deepest affections to all who had them. It was a
brief message. He did not mention the incident with the friendly glamgorn, though it sat heavily
in his thoughts: such things should never be committed to paper. Rossamünd had never
mentioned Freckle in any of his previous communications home. Asking the house-major if he
might use his wafer, Rossamünd sealed the missive in a second blot of paper.
The next morning he went to Aubergene, intending to ask him to pass his letter onto the PostMaster of Bleakhall at the end of the next night's lighting-leg. The lampsmen had just returned
from dousing, and were down in the cellars washing. Aubergene stood by a well bucket with hat
on yet shirt off, showing bare back and shoulders crawling with scars and cruorpunxis: gruesome
faces that glared and sneered from shoulder, back or chest, mute witness of a lamplighter's violent
life.
Rossamünd almost slipped the last few steps in shock.
Of course he had seen cruorpunxis before, but not so many on one person. This fellow
seemed too young to possess such evidence of experience and slaughter. What great and terrible
things had Aubergene done to earn such markings? How many of those snarling faces had
actually deserved to end so ignobly as pictures to adorn a man's trunk?
Shaking, the young lighter turned and hurried back up and away. I thought Aubergene was
only against the worst monsters — how many of the worst ones can there be? He would ask
someone some other time for the letter to be delivered.
*

*

*

*

*

Later that week an unexpected thing occurred. A letter came for Rossamünd.

Rossamünd Bookchild
Lampsman 3rd Class
Wormstool Cothouse
The Pendant Wig
The Idlewild
16th Heimio HIR 1601
Rossamünd,
I thank you for your communication of the 2nd of Heimio and the 6th of the same. I shall start
with congratulations on your promotion. Its gaining might be early but it is still well deserved: you
shall make a fine lighter.
The matter of Numption and his bloom baths was so distressing I nearly took the fast adviceboat in harbor back to the manse. Whatever I can do from here I will and shall.
As you have no doubt deduced from the address line, the Marshal and I remain in the subcapital.
The whole process of interviews and reviews goes interminably slow. One day we might get a brief
meeting to simply make a time for another brief meeting that might occur another week later. After
all the rush and bluster of the first summons, the bureaucrats here are in no great hurry to give us a
hearing.

All of this is more troublesome by the unsettling buzz that the Marshal might actually be relieved
of his post, and the longer we are delayed our proper review, the more likely this wretched injustice
becomes. There is certainly something most insalubrious and cunning in the coincidence of events.
What you have written to me in your second communiqué is unfortunately of no small surprise, but
with so many good folk all so unfortuitously removed from the manse there is currently little that
can be immediately done. What is more we need harder proofs than we currently have.
I wish I could write you happier tidings, but now is not that season. Nevertheless it is wise to
remember that the most important battle to win is the last.
Of Discipline and Limb,

Sebastipole
Lamplighter's Agent
Falseman to the Earl of the Baton Imperial of Fayelillian,
Lamplighter-Marshal of Winstermill
Epistra Scuthae
The Considine
The Patricine
Do not write to me upon these matters any further — some seals have been tampered; information
is going where it should not.
Once he had read it, Rossamünd simply looked at the missive numbly. He wished too that
Sebastipole could have written happier things. Eventually numbness turned into an anxious,
angry gripping up under his ribs as he realized just how helpless he was to aid the LamplighterMarshal or Sebastipole or even Numps. So much good in Rossamünd's small sphere was being
brought to dust by the skillful machinations of a self-serving few. He showed the letter to
Threnody, who snorted cynically when she was done reading it.
"The Marshal and the Agent flummoxed too: what are we to do now?" she said, apparently
more interested in cleaning and admiring her pristine pistolas. "The honorable suffer and the
crafty prevail."
Rossamünd thought to show it to the house-major, yet what would it matter to him really,
besides which he was sure Sebastipole would rather his private messages were not shown about.
So Rossamünd continued to heed Europe's warning and keep his thoughts to himself. Yet no
matter how many nights he lay half sleeping, fretting over a solution, it never came. All he could
see before him were limitless days of duty at Wormstool — small, remote, irrelevant.
Surely something good will come from all this wretchedness?
*

*

*

*

*

One crisp, clear and early evening where the air itself felt as if it could snap with the chill,
Rossamünd was at sentry on the roof with Under-Sergeant Poesides and Lampsman 2nd Class
Theudas.
The Fighting Top was a spectacular perch when no fog was about to hide the scene, a wholecompass view of the Frugelle, flat as flat could possibly be in any direction he cared to look.
There were no hills, few very shallow valleys — mere depressions in the earth, and endless
withered shrubs and drought-blasted trees. Indeed, from up on the roof, the only notable feature
— apart from a tiny wood of swamp oaks to the northeast — was the Wormway itself. The

Pendant Wig went west on the left hand, and kinked to east-northeast on the right: the final
length of road before all habitation ceased completely and only wide, empty wilds were left. On
the horizon, drawn as a deep reddish-purple line, was the western border of the fabled Ichormeer,
the Gluepot, the Blood-Marsh, a brooding mark on the edge of vision. He could almost feel
threwd radiate from it, reaching even here, like the heat of a bonfire.
Yet tonight, sitting quietly, Rossamünd observed the lantern-watch at the lighting instead,
already four lamps down the way. How he loved the beauty of the gradual increase in the light of
a newly wound great-lamp, the colors shifting from grassy-green through straw-yellow and, if the
water was new, to wine-vinegar clear.
As he watched, a fifth lantern began to glow green.
High off the ground, on watch with brave men, he felt his troubles markedly diminished here.
A long and distant caw of a crow drifted in on the cold, fennel-perfumed breeze while restless
wrens twittered and dashed about in the thistles. Rossamünd relished the lightening of his soul.
Threnody and he were talking once more, though they were yet to fully heal, and the passing of
only a little time left him feeling less troubled about Freckle. He gave an almost contented sigh.
Poesides, who had been staring out to the south with a perspective glass, suddenly scuttled
across the narrow walk between the tiles and the wall, crouched behind a rain-butt and waved the
two others to do the same. "Stay out o’ sight," he hissed excitedly. "There's some li'l bogle
thingy creeping down by the runnel there, not much more than one part of a mile yonder. If it
don't spot us we might get a chance to take a few shots at the pot and spare ourselves a nasty end
when we're out lighting."
Grinning grimly, Theudas peeked over the battlement. "I see it! The movement by them
dwarfish willow-myrtles, aye?"
"Aye!" On his haunches, Poesides edged forward, easing up his firelock, creeping his muzzle
onto the rim of the fortification.
Straining his neck, Rossamünd could not see what they saw among the low twine of dry longgrass and tangled thickets of parched trees all across broad moorlands. Then he did: something
small and furtive not more than two hundred yards away, making quick scutters from root clump
to root clump along the shallow bed of a barely running creek, one of the many that curled east
then north past the cothouse, to eventually drain into the sluggish river Frugal. In one horrid
breath Rossamünd realized he was looking at Freckle. The midget glamgorn obviously thought it
was being rather cunning, coming at the fortlet from behind, and seemed unaware that it was
observed.
Does he still wasn’t to take me away?
"Come on, Master Haroldus, get yer firelock up," Poesides chided. "Ye cain't hit naught with
it slack at yer side."
"But what would Mama Lieger say?" Rossamünd cried.
The under-sergeant hesitated for a mere beat. He gave the young lighter a look as if to say,
"Who has a care for what Mama Lieger might say!" and lifted the butt of his own long-rifle,
leveled it and, nice-and-easy, squeezed the trigger.
Hiss-CRACK!
The shot cracked out across the flats. Water hens burst from some covet away to the right and
quit the scene in fright; teals hurried away, their wings whistling loudly; little wrens scattered to
all points, their angry chirrups and the hurry of their flight filling the air.
Miss — miss — miss... Rossamünd panicked, on the verge of a scream.
Poesides cursed under his breath as he realized he had missed his mark.
Rossamünd could have burst with relief.
"Cunning little skink," the under-sergeant growled. "I reckon he ducked that!"
"Let me have a pull," said Theudas. "Where is it?"
"Leftmost of the three thickets, down by that huge thistle-bush," answered Poesides, sitting
back down on the angle of the roof, rapidly reloading his long-rifle.

"Ah, I see it..." the younger man muttered, "I think."
Making a show of presenting his fusil, a cold sweat of guilty horror clinging in the small of
his back, Rossamünd had gratefully lost sight of the glamgorn again. For the first time he was
glad for his lack of skill with a fusil. The chance of him actually scoring a hit was remote at best
at this range. "Shouldn't we just send someone out to grab it or fright it off?" he asked in a hoarse
croak, wanting to buy the little fellow some time to escape.
"What!" Poesides exclaimed huskily. "And chance some bigger basket springing at us from
some nell? I have seen little blighters cooperatin' with some great gnasher, lure ye along thinking
ye're in for an easy marking to add to yer skin and boo! Out of no place: something thrice as big,
and ye're the mug being chased right back the way ye came." He primed the pan. "Our li'l mite
out there is probably in cahoots with that nasty skulker we almost met out in the fog the other
morn," the under-sergeant added as he rammed the wadding home.
"No! I heard that handsome Branden Rose dig got that one," Theudas corrected.
"Well, either way, ye can't let a bogle go free — it just ain't moral."
Rossamünd just wished Freckle would get away and save himself. He winced as Theudas too
aim.
Hissss-FSSST!
A misfire!
Theudas had taken a shot, yet all he got was a flash in the pan, no burst from the breech, nor
ball hurtling from the muzzle. "Not again!" he cried. "I don't care what Shuddercrank says, there
is something a-foul with the touchhole!" Amid a flurry of uncouth words Theudas wrestled with
his weapon to find the fault.
"It's fossicking about in the thicket over yonder... Do you think it suspects it's been found
out?" Poesides chuckled, and humming "Stand While You Can" to himself, paused between the
third and fourth stanza to let go another shot. "Ah, blight it! It's surely a crafty li'l bugaboo!"
The musket fire brought the other lampsmen, poking their heads through the trap in the roof
or out of the unshuttered windows a floor below, to catch sight of the spectacle. Aubergene
arrived on the Fighting Top bearing his own long-rifle, but he and the onlookers were to be
disappointed.
The glamgorn was gone.
Rossamünd sat blank-faced, frazzled nerves tingling in strange and anxious relief.
"Well, either we hit it, or it found some way to scurry off," the under-sergeant said, chewing
his bottom lip, "‘cause there ain't been a movement down in the creek for a little while now."
Poesides searched through his perspective glass till it was too dark to see, and prevailed on
Crescens Hugh the lurksman to aid him. Yet, to Rossamünd's secret delight, not a trace of the
diminutive creature could be discovered.
He lay his head to sleep that night with the barred, misty light of the waxing moon shining on
his face through a high window, feeling keenly the huge difference between him and his fellow
lighters. After their visit with Mama Lieger, Rossamünd had nurtured the notion that these men
were of a more subtle cast. Yet after that afternoon's shooting, they had confirmed themselves to
him as unthinking monster-haters. What they called moral, he called mindlessness; what he
would call right knowing, they would call treachery most foul. He lay and watched the moon a
long time, understanding full well Phoebë's cold isolation.

26
A Show of Strength
Scale of Might, the ~ originally an anecdotal reckoning of the number of everymen it takes to best an ünterman,
it has since been extensively codified by Imperial Statisticians, but simply put it is deemed possible for three ordinary
men armed in the ordinary manner to see off one garden-variety bogle, and about five to handle your more common
nicker. Add potives or teratologists to the group and this number fluctuates significantly — depending on the quality
of potive or skill and type of monster-slayer.

T

hough they had served at Wormstool for well over a month, House-Major Grystle still
did not send Rossamünd or Threnody out on lantern-watch, but left them on permanent daywatch. This arrangement allowed two other better experienced lampsmen to go out lanternlighting who might otherwise be held back. At full strength, the lamp-watch of Wormstool and
her sister cots along the Pendant Wig had once been nine or even ten strong for every outing.
This number was reckoned sufficient to see of most threats, and if not, there were always the halfburied fortifications Rossamünd had been so curious about along the roadside.
Called basements or stone-harbors, these cramped fortlets were just big enough to fit a quarto
of lighters and there accoutrements, preserved foods and a firkin or two of stale water. Every
other lampsman had a key to their stout doors and the lantern-watch could seek refuge in them for
well over a week: more than long enough, it was thought, for the monsters to lose interest and
move on, or for a rescue to liberate the trapped.
To give them time to better accommodate to a lampsmen's life the house-major decided to put
Threnody and Rossamünd under the charge of Splinteazle, Seltzerman 2nd Class. They would
accompany him on many tasks, replacing bloom, refitting lantern-lights, cleaning panes — a task
that always made Rossamünd glum as he brooded on the plight of poor Numps. Whenever they
went out a run-down flat cart went with them, its sag with the necessary stocks of tools and parts.
This cart was kept in a solid stone outbuilding attached to the back of the cothouse and was drawn
by a he-donkey with incredibly large ears, which earned the poor creature the name Cuniculus —
or "Rabbit." This stolid best was kept in the cellar and brought carefully down the cothouse steps
whenever he was needed. Rossamünd greatly enjoyed the work, but Threnody did not and would
stand by restlessly while they labored.
One cold, misty morning Splinteazle and his two aides set out to restock the basement found
at the bottom of the lamp at East Bleak 36 West Stool 10. Haggard and blotched from a life spent
at sea, his skull wrapped in a tight black kerchief — vinegaroon fashion — under his cocked
thrice-high — Splinteazle whistled to the rising sun. Today he was in particularly goo spirits, for
today was Dirgetide, the last day of winter, which, apart from a great slap-up meal for mains,
meant a season of fewer theroscades.
The delicate mist softened the arid land with its opalescent sheen, filling dells and hollows
and runnel-beds with cloudy film. Gray birds with black hoods dipped and rose from perch to
perch among the stunted swamp oaks, calling on the wing, giving their maudlin, churring songs to
the hazy morning.
"Ahh," muttered Splinteazle, staring at them, "the sthtorm-birdsth are out: it'll be rain today,
and our butts'th filled again with fresh water." Missing his two front teeth, the seltzerman had a
naval burr that was marred with a lisp.
For all the condensation, it was still a thirsty walk. Wearing his new hat and pallmain and
wrapped in Europe's warm scarf, Rossamünd had come laden with fodicar, his knife in its
scabbard attached to his baldric, salumanticum and his own satchel holding a day's ration. He
took a drink from a water skin.

"Here'sth a mite o’ wisthdom for ye," Splinteazle said, stooping to the roadside. "I've stheen
yee both take a sthecond and even a third gulp of ye water. At that rate ye'll have drunk it out and
be wanting. A better way isth to avastht yer drinking and pick a pebble like I've got here and plop
it into yer mouth to sthuck." He did as he explained, putting a small, pale stone between his thin
lips. "Keepsth yer mouth watering and thirstht at bay."
Obeying, Rossamünd was amazed to find the advice was sound. On the verge as they walked,
he noticed scattered many smooth pebbles, and wondered if they were made this way in the
mouths of so many vanished generations of thirsty lighters working interminably up and down the
road. With faint repulsion, he thought of how many maws the very rock he sucked on might have
previously inhabited, and mastered the urge to spit it out.
They crossed the path of Squarmis plodding east on some cryptic errand. The costerman paid
the young lighters no mind but engaged in insults with the seltzerman as they passed.
"Slubberdymouth!" Squarmis drawled in abusive greeting.
"Fartgullet!" Splinteazle returned without hesitation.
Only Rabbit was pleased to see the costerman, or rather the fellow's old she-ass, who nipped
at Rossamünd walking by. Braying and bellowing, the seltzerman's donkey tried to turn and
follow the retreating object of its passion. Splinteazle fought to keep the brute beast's head
pointed in the correct direction and stop Rabbit running off after his sweetheart.
"Lamplassth!" the seltzerman grunted as he wrestled his donkey. "Help me hold the Rabbit.
Nothing will turn him now, daft basthket! Bookchild! Go down to that schwamp oak yonder and
get me a branch. It'sth the only thing to move him."
Rossamünd spotted the appropriate tree not more than a dozen yards north of the highroad.
With a dash he descended the side of the road and ran a lane through the thistles to the small
swamp oak. He grasped a branch and tore it off with ease and saw yellow eyes watching from a
gorse patch not more than five yards away. Pebble or not, Rossamünd's mouth went dry.
"Freckle?" he called softly. The little fellow had survived. What is more, he was still
watching out for him.
"Hurry there, lad!" came Splinteazle's urgent call.
The eyes disappeared with a rustle, and feeling both disappointment and elation, the young
lighter hustled back to the road.
The seltzerman had spoken true: Rabbit adored the taste of swamp-oak needles more than
eve the she-mule. With Rossamünd going ahead using the branch as a lure, the creature was
induced to walk on.
"Poor old Rabbit," Splinteazle chuckled tenderly, once the donkey was walking freely again.
"He'sth hopelessthly sthmitten on Assthanina — that'sth that filthy Sthquarmis fellow'sth lady
mule, don't ye know — Rabbit goesth braying after her every time we're in town. Poor deluded
fool of a donkey don't realizthe that Assthanina is not in the amorousth way."
For Rossamünd's part he wanted to keep looking out to the north into the scrub to spy Freckle.
Yet he feared giving the persistent glamgorn away and forced his eyes to stay to his front.
When they arrived at the basement, the seltzerman took out a large cast-brass key and
descended to unlock the heavy, narrow entrance to the stone-harbor. The lock and hinges
whinged rustily and proved of little use. The inside of the basement was stuffy, cavelike and
typically cramped. Though he could stand tall, Rossamünd saw that Splinteazle was force to
move about in a ducking hunch. The young lighter examined the view from the tight slit of a
loophole. The mist was coming in thicker, and he could not see more than a small arc of the road
and flatland to the north.
They slowly unloaded the flat cart, which creaked in a kind of inanimate gratitude for the
relief of the burden on its aged timbers and axles.
"Ye're sthtrong and quick for a were lighter, lad, and that'sth the truth. Young Master
Haroldus'th indeed!" To Threnody's sluggish unwillingness the seltzerman warned, "Take up the
sthlack, young hearty, and clap on sthome sthpeed; that'sth no way to stherve yer Emperor!"

"I might wear your colors, sir," she hissed, snatching some small box, "but I do not serve your
besotted, bedazzled Emperor."
"Besthotted, eh? Bedizzthled?" he said as she turned. "Isth that what they taught thee in thy
sthequethtury? What doesth ye think taking theEmperor'sth Billion meansth?"
The stores were kept under a trapdoor in a rough-cut pit in the back corner of the outwork.
For each new puncheon or cask or crate they carried in, an old one had to be removed and taken
up and put on the cart. Even with Threnody reluctant to do the task, restocking was completed
quickly and the three were soon strolling home. Along the return, a shrill cry, brief and birdlike,
pierced the gauzy stillness four times, tangible alarm in its echoes.
The three workers became very still.
Rossamünd stared about, trying to see everywhere at once.
"It'sth a water hen," Splinteazle stated in ominous whisper. "They only cry when the worstht
of blight'sth basthketsth are about. Sthomething wicked-foul musth surely be out there. We
mustht hurry!"
Not much farther on, they found that East Bleak 41 West Stool 5 had been smashed: bent
over like nothing more than a broken grass-blade, the lamp's still dizzing seltzer already soaking
into the hard surface of the road.
The smell of monsters — the telltale stink of pungent musk and almost animal filth found
them, floating on the quickening breeze.
"Hi," Splinteazle exclaimed in the barest of whispers, "catch a nosthe full o’ that reek!
They're sthurelysthome of the wortht bugerboosth ye're everlikely to hide from."
The next lamp they discovered missing altogether, ripped footing and lal from the verge.
"Desthtroying me lovely lampsth!" cried Splinteazle. "Killin' me bloom!"
Rossamünd became aware of a threwdishly unpleasant, impelling sensation buzzing behind
his eyes. It grew with each step, spreading to the base of his head, to the core of his innards; an
external, ambient yet powerful compulsion to act, to do something or else suffer displeasure.
From who? Is Mama Lieger doing this? What am I supposed to do? Rossamünd had no notion,
but the dread of this sensation waxed terribly. Oddly, Threnody and Splinteazle did not appear to
heed it.
And the closer they drew to Wormstool the stronger the bestial smell became.
Though the cothouse was a mile away and part hidden by the mists, Rossamünd could make
out swamp harriers gliding the clearer air above in hungry expectation. The mad baying of the
dogs came faintly. Even from this distance they could make out something large, perhaps an ettin
pounding against the cothouse. Rossamünd instinctively checked his salumanticum. There was
nothing in it that would affect something so enormous.
"The cothouse is attacked!" Splinteazle wailed and set off down the road at a run, pulling the
contrary Rabbit with him, the young lamplighters following his lead. A lantern-span closer, they
saw more than just an ettin attacking their home. On the road before the tower and in the scrub
about its foundations a crowd of monsters prowled, an entire menagerie of them, numbering a
score or more of myriad kinds and sizes. They seemed to work in concert, hooting and hissing
and yowling up at the besieged lighters within, drawing and dodging shots fired from loophole
and roof. This was a theroscade of a kind that Rossamünd had only read. The three rushed on in
thoughtless, unspoken agreement, marching into this overwhelming danger regardless.
The powerful ettin, much heftier than the Misbegotten Schrewd, flourished a lantern in its
massive hands and with it smashed at the door of Wormstool. An old cart looking very much like
Squarmis' old bone-shaker was lashed to its head with rope and harness leather, providing some
protection from musket fire above, the thills thrust out over its back like horns and the wheels
looking like weird ears. Pops of smoke were puffing from the slits of every floor of the tower,
and from the crenellations of the Fighting Top as well. Much of the fire was concentrated on the
ettin, the beast swatting at the balls as a man might at flies. Many of the shots must have been
true and deadly, for Rossamünd and his companions were not much farther up the road when the

giant nicker tottered, righted itself and threw the lamp at the walls. The post hit the cothouse with
a clarion ring, ricocheted and spun off madly to crash on the road. Stumbling, the ettin staggered
away north into the flatlands, clutching at its bloodied head and shoulders. With a dull crunch of
splintering wood, the ettin ripped the cart away and hurled this heedlessly too as it fled.
"Look at that belugig run! Come now, fellowsth!" Splinteazle cried to Rossamünd and
Threnody. "We mustht join the fight!"
Once more Rossamünd felt the malignantly compelling threwd; felt it throb and saw the
remaining monsters at the cothouse's feet respond obediently. Smaller nickers and larger bogles
began to scamper up the stairs: things with hunched bodies and long legs, bounding a dozen steps
in one leap; gaunt, stilt-legged bugaboos that took each step with the mincing grace of a dancer;
bloated bogle-beasties that lumbered after.
"The door is breached!" wailed the seltzerman, abandoning Rabbit to run to the aid of the
assaulted tower.
Amid a whirl of useless garble, Rossamünd followed and Threnody with him, chicking the
priming of her two doglock pistols. The young lighter could scarce believe that he was willingly
throwing himself into the fray. He reached into his salumanticum for a caste of loomblaze.
The tower of Wormstool was close now, no more than a hundred yards away, the clamor of
the desperate struggle within audible even down on the road. Not more than a hundred yards
from the cothouse near the base of the first lantern, Rossamünd cried, "HI! HI! OVER HERE!"
carried away by his desire to help. A pack of monsters still at the foot of the steps and circling
about Wormstool's foundations turned to Rossamünd's shout. With hoots and howls, they
swarmed at the three, loping and leaping down the road with appalling speed.
Splinteazle was ahead of the two younger lighters, brandishing his fodicar in one hand and a
salinumbus in the other. The monsters closed and he fired, sending one flailing, spurting to the
road-dust. At the shot Rossamünd threw his vial of loomblaze high and wide, wanting to avoid
the seltzerman, and it erupted over the heads of two stragglers, their shrieks clear in the general
din. Threnody fired too, pistolas thrust forward in classic pistoleer pose, but the power of the
doglocks must have thrown off her aim, and they had little effect on the beasts. The seltzerman
swung his lantern-crook with all his might, hitting the foremost bogle hard but doing little harm.
Was Splinteazle that old and infirm? He struck it again with all his force, and Rossamünd
watched with a numb kind of horror as once more the blow hardly troubled the gnasher. Cackling
and barely hurt, the beast tackled Splinteazle to the ground and, finding all the weak parts of his
proofing, rapidly clawed the hollering seltzerman to shreds before Rossamünd knew to act. With
a shriek of her own, Threnody flung her fine pistols down and scathed powerfully, stunning
Rossamünd but driving the bogles back amazed. Yet it was too late for the old seltzerman.
Numbness turned to terror and Rossamünd hesitated. The will-filled threwd resisted him,
undermined his resolve. If the seltzerman could perish so easily, what hope had he?
Undismayed, the gaggle of nickers pounced again, some outflanking them as the rest rushed
headlong. The monsters were on them, the stink of the beasts surrounding the two young lighters.
Threnody sent forth her frission, which this time left Rossamünd untouched but gave the pack of
gnashers a sharp jolt. They howled at her in rage. But she could not keep such a barrier up for
long, and too soon something sleek and full of claws leaped at her. Shouting wordlessly,
Rossamünd leapted to meet the beast. Dancing aside from its swiping talons, he brought the buttend of his fodicar down with as much strength as he could muster. To his utter astonishment the
monster's back buckled and bet the wrong way under the blow and it fell, naked surprise on its
bestial face. But he did not have time to wonder over its end, for Threnody's fishing faltered and
the other nickers sprang, sneering hungrily and more intent on the girl-wit. In the frightening,
gnashing whirl of a fight where he was one of the players and life and death stood on his own
deeds, Rossamünd did not fuss about where his feet were, what his hands were doing. He just hit.
One with a great lump of warts and lard tha pronked on two legs like a rabbit's tried to leap about
and get behind them. Threnody scathed again, a little weaker. Rossamünd stabbed at Rabbit-legs

as it jumped. The pike-end of the fodicar went straight through its belly, the astounded beast
expiring in midspring, collapsing on the road and skidding away. The Hundred Rules that had
baffled Rossamünd so continually at Madam Opera's were suddenly making sense. The young
lighter swung his lantern-crook again with ease, giving another bloated monster second thoughts
as he caught its lunge with crank-hook and pike-end then shoved the bogle clear away. It glared
at him with an odd expression.
At his back, Threnody's sometimes clumsy, sometimes competent striving continued. For all
her inexperience, she was actually gaining him space and protecting them both from being
overwhelmed.
The monsters pulled away, dismayed at the ferocity of such tasty little morsels, rethinking
their foe. Rossamünd and Threnody stood back to back and watched in turn. Of the eight or so
bogles that had sought their lives, perhaps half had perished: one shot by Splinteazle, two struck
down by Rossamünd, one or possibly two hurt by the loomblaze and another drooling and broken
and sitting harmlessly by the highroad, a victim of Threnody's successful witting.
"Do you feel it?" she gasped.
"Feel what?"
"The threwd!" Threnody opened her eyes. "Working entirely on the destruction of this place.
It snatches at me every time I wit!"
Rossamünd nodded. "Aye, I feel it."
Indeed, the malign feeling waxed strongly even as they spoke, and the monsters prowled
closer.
BOOOOM! An almightly crash reverberated about the Frugelle, startling flocks of
complaining birds to wing. Down the road smoke began to issue from Wormstool, belching from
a fourth-story loophole. A tongue of flame licked out and up the outside wall. A lighter stumbled
out of the high door of the cothouse and started down the steps. A large nicker with great,
snapping jaws emerged and pounced on the retreating lampsman, crushing him down onto the
stairway, jumping on him over and over till his screams ceased and red flowed.
Threnody stared in dumb shock.
Taking shrewd advantage of the distraction, the four remaining monsters rushed the two
young lighters. Shrieking fiendishly, they charged in, then skittered away again when Threnody
rallied and finally strove. They were testing her. She began to growl in frustration as time and
again they fooled her into scathing pointlessly, wearing her down. Rossamünd threw another
charge of loomblaze at the largest bogle, the one with peglike teeth in its spadelike jaw, but
missed. The fiery chemistry burst bright but uselessly in a thicket of bushes beyond the road, and
the dry branches eagerly took to flame.
Observing the commotion, the slayer of the lighter on the steps descended and pranced up the
counduit, joining its fellows on the road. The largest of them, this new beast strutted on its thin
legs and slavered through its long snout at the two young lighters. It regarded them beadily then
called across to them in a weird, slobbering voice, "What are you, pink lipsss?"
"I hate it when they talk!" Threnody seethed.
"What are you, pink lipsss!" it slobbered again. "Why do you ssside with themmm?"
"I think it's talking to you, lamp boy," Threnody muttered. "Maybe it's been chatting with
your Freckle friend."
Rossamünd swallowed hard but did not answer. Pink lips? This was the meaning of
Rossamünd's name — rose-mouth, pink lips. How did it know his name? Perhaps it had indeed
been talking to Freckle? He looked to the tatters of Splinteazle's corpse beyond the monsters.
His resolve hardened. He held out his fodicar, presenting arms as at a parade, inviting a
challenge.
With a vicious snarl the slobbering nicker lunged at them, the other monsters rushing with it,
whooping and yammering. Threnody witted, laboring to keep her frission under control. For a
moment she checked the charge, Rossamünd standing with fodicar and loomblaze ready, by her

side. The monsters writhed and backed away. Suddenly the girl gasped, and without warning her
frission faltered. The samund beasts were at them again, the slobberer foremost, and Rossamünd
sprang too. He hurled the potive with wicked aim, missing the slobberer and hitting a stocky
bogle running just behind it. The wretched thing's head was splashed and engulfed with the cruel
false-fire and it fell screeching. As he met the slobberer, fodicar swinging, so Threnody's frission
returned and the small gnashers reeled. He swatted at the slobberer with the same thoughtless,
clearheaded fluidity, hitting it smartingly on its shoulder. The thing shrieked and flailed its arms,
swatting Rossamünd in the chest and throwing him back-first to the road. Threnody's witting
caught him and his vision dimmed, threatened blackness; but this was not time for stopping, for
lying tamely down just because of a hurt. With a yelping kind of growl, Rossamünd shook
himself and rolled onto his side, his vision clearing. What had seemed to him like a dangerous
pause had been just an instant. The slobberer bore down on him. Rossamünd whipped his
lantern-crook around, smacking the nicker's ankles. Its long legs were tripped out from under it
and the thing toppled, a puff of dust erupting from its fall. On his feet in a beat, Rossamünd took
his advantage and struck the fallen monster wildly, not caring where, just hitting, hitting, as
Threnody's frission lashed out again.
It was too much now — the bogles had had enough. They were quitting the fight, running
back up the Wormway and off into the wilderness. Not satisfied, Threnody trod determinedly
toward the cothouse, striving at the monsters inside. Still flailing in fury at the slobberer as it
struggled to rise, Rossamünd was vaguely aware that lumpy bogles were fleeing the tower; one
even leaped from the roof, landing with a mighty crash in some bushes and, yipping girlishly,
disappeared into the scrub. With their escape, the malice of the threwd flared strong for a
moment then subsided, leaving only confused watchfulness.
Rossamünd kept hitting, and only when he had smote the utter ruin of the stomping,
slobbering nicker did he cease. He stared down at the shattered, mangled creature at his feet:
somehow it still lived, glaring up at him, still defiant, still baleful, still hungry. Yet now
Rossamünd could not hate the fiendly thing, no matter what it had done to the doughty, friendly
lighters of Wormstool. Now he just felt tired and sorry: sorry for the death of his comrades;
sorry for the harm he had done the monster before him, to all the monsters; sorry that he had
become the murderer, the hypocrite.
"I am sorry to have slain thee," he whispered, little knowing from where the words came.
"But we were at odds and I could not let you hurt my friends."
The creature's eyes glazed, a sadness — an ancient longing — seeming to dwell in them for a
moment, and it ceased.
Gory fodicar still in hand, Rossamünd dropped to his knees and wept.
"Surely you don't weep over the monsters!" he heard Threnody croak as she picked up her
doglocks, still lying where she had discarded them. She sat exhausted on the road and thirstily
downed a milky blue liquid.
Rossamünd doubled over, keening agony in his very depths. He felt a subtle touch on his
lantern-crook. Looking up, he saw that same familiar sparrow perched on the bunting-hook. It
gave a single firm chirp as if it were chiding him, and whirred away.
"Oh, go away!" Threnody shied the empty alembant bottle at the departing bird. "A fat lot of
good you did for us just now! Go back to your master and tell him the happy news!"
"Threnody!" Rossamünd cried as the flask missed well wide and disappeared into the thistles
below.
In her sudden fury the girl turned on him, and for a moment he thought she might throw
something at him too. But she did not.
Rossamünd stood, leaning on his fodicar as if it were a geriatric's cane.
Though smoke was billowing from the upper stories and carrion crows were already perching
upon the chimney pots, Rossamünd and Threnody still walked to it and climbed to the front door,

stepping with heavy grief over the body on the steps. It was Theudas. In the watch room the
doors to the cellars had been torn from hinges and cast aside. The collapsible stair, now nothing
more than a wreckage of timbers, had worked perfectly; yet this had not been enough to stop the
murderous nickers from gaining the higher floors. It was, however, more than adequate in
preventing the two survivors from getting above. They called out, screamed and screeched till
they were hoarse, hoping to hear the answering plaints of a survivor from the upper levels. But
no such answers came, only the hiss and crack of fire unchecked.
Together the two hastily scrounged whatever they could from the litter — food parcels and
water skins found in the cellars and with them a flammagon. Among the ruination they
discovered the inert white mass of Sequecious, bloodied and cold, collapsed across an equally fat,
blilious-looking bogle with great blood-red fangs. It too was dead, the boltarde that slew it still
clutched by Sequecious, the aspis-smeared blade thrust full through its ribs, scorch marks
showing hat it had received the blast of a firelock. Man and monster had died together.
Whelpmoon lay faceup by his squat lectern, his glasses missing, his dead eyes staring. By the
kennels the dogs had managed to destroy a brace of scaly, big-nosed bogles, perishing themselves
as they did.
Men and dogs and monsters, everything was dead. Rossamünd could only imagine the gore
and carnage on the floors above. Too much... too much... His extremities began tingling, and just
as his anguish became overwhelming it was quickly obscured by a weird, empty flatness.
A terrible smashing report thundered from the floors above and shook the fortalice.
"We must go," Threnody insisted, standing at the top of the cellar steps.
Back down the road, the two survivors tried to bring Rabbit with them, but the loyal, stupid
beast would not leave his friend and master. Flat cart still hitched, it had slowly followed them
and now stood forlornly by Splinteazle's remains and would not move. Not even a sprig of
swamp oak could induce it to come away. The two young lighters would have had to drag it
every single step to get the beast to Bleak Lynche, and they might have done but were desperate
to be gone. So they unhitched the cart and left the faithful donkey standing at the base of the
tower, ears down, head down, nosing the seltzerman's cooling corpse.
"What a waste," Threnody spat, venting her angry grief as they fled. "It's idiotic. Even out
here, with hardly anyone to benefit, they still go on risking lives to light the lamps each evening
and douse them each dawning. No one in the cities cares — not even in the towns around about
are people mindful or grateful. Whoever uses this part of the road? The Bleaksmen stay put.
That place is nothing more than a cothouse with a fistful of desperadoes setting up shot about it
— what's the point?" Imperial waste!" She gagged back a sob.
"But if they did not make a stand here everyone west would suffer!" Rossamünd's
contradiction was reflexive, yet in truth he actually agreed with her.
"Do you really think the flimsy string they call the Wormway, with its few tottering towers so
close to the Gluepot and the tired quartos that habit them, is a match for the gathered might of the
monsters? Look how easy it was for a small band of brodchin to annihilate one cothouse. It's the
work of my sisters that keeps your precious western folk safe!"
Rossamünd had no answer for this — he just wanted to get to somewhere secure. He found
himself hoping Mama Lieger might shuffle from the scrub and lend them aid. How can she have
let this happen? Did she cause all this? Was the threwd of the land itself the culprit? Is that what
I felt?
An almighty shattering boom roared behind them, scaring them so much they both let out a
yelp. They looked back to see the shingle roof of the cothouse collapsing inward with a seething
eruption of smoke, sparks jetting from the shell of the tower. Rossamünd spied a hasty little
shadow scuttling after them.
Freckle?
Walking on, Rossamünd ached to speak with the glamgorn, to ask question after question, but
most of all — why? Why were they attacked? Why did the glamgorn not help? Why was he still

following him? However, with Threnody by Rossamünd's side, Freckle would never come near.
Strangely, irrationally, the young prentice felt safer with Freckle at their backs.
The day grew darker still and, as poor dead Splinteazle had predicted, it began to rain.
Monsterlike shapes seemed to lurk and lunge in the gloom, phantasms made by the rapid fall of
water. At least I have my hat, Rossamünd thought bitterly.
A far-off cry — a shriek and a gabber — came from somewhere out on the flatland. It was an
inhuman call, a monster's voice. Rossamünd cringed at the noise and almost tripped, expecting
any moment to be waylaid again. Though they were exhausted, desperation and blank terror set
the two lighters running, a weary stumbling lurch, each helping the other if ever one flagged.
When the glimmer of the lights of Bleak Lynche hove in sight, Rossamünd eagerly took up
the flammagon and shot its spluttering pink fire into the air. The flare drew a high, lazy arc, the
falling damps carrying it northward. It winked out as if fell on the downside of its curve. They
had little hope of it attracting attention, yet it did: a ten-strong foray of the Bleakhall day-watch.
The band of lighters that found them could little believe what they were told: a whole
cothouse slaughtered? Surely not! Several lampsmen gave shouts of lament. Scrutineers were
sent to Wormstool, the sneakiest of the band, while Rossamünd and Threnody were hustled back
to Bleakhall. There the astounded Fortunatus the house-major conducted a hasty inquiry. He
kept asking the same questions: "What happened? Where are the other lampsmen? How is it
just you two survived?"
Rossamünd did not know how to answer except with the truth.
Fortunatus could not accept their shocking tale until the piquet of scrutineers returned,
dragging Rabbit, braying mournfully, with them. These doughty fellows confirmed the blackest
truth: a whole cothouse slaughtered; friends torn and all dead, the ransacked fortlet open to the
elements. They brought with them body parts and several bruicles of cruor as proof, as offered
one of these to the two survivors. "So ye might mark yeselfs proudly!" they said.
Rossamünd refused. The handing out of awards at such a time seemed so wrong to him —
ill-timed and disrespectful. It did not occur to him that his feats would warrant a marking, maybe
even four according to the grisly count that revolved ceaselessy in his mind.
"Not want a mark?" was the general, incredulous reaction. "That ain't natural!" But they did
not press him.
Threnody, however, gladly received the blood, and this was a great satisfaction to the other
lighters. "My first cruorpunxis," she murmured, scrutinizing the bruicle closely. Either way, all
agreed that Grindrod must have improved greatly in his teaching of prentices to raise such
doughty young lighters.

27
A Light To Your Path
obsequy what we would call a funeral, also known as a funery or inurment. These rites typically include a
declaration of the person's merit and then some traditional farewell given by the mourners. In the Haacobin Empire it
is most commonly thought that when people die they simply stop: a life begins, a life ends. In the cultures about
them and in their own past there have been various beliefs about afterlife and some all-creating elemental personage,
but such notions are considered oppressive and outmoded. They would rather leave those ideas to the eekers, pistins
(believers in a God) and other odd fringe-dwellers.

G

iven his own room in the Fend & Fodicar and saloop spiked with a healthy dose of
bellpomash, Rossamünd slept two days through after the attack, while outside the rain became a
fierce storming downpour. He did not know till he had woken again that a dispatch had been sent
to Winstermill informing them of the terrible things done at Wormstool and of the two young
survivors. Neither was he aware that the loss of that cothouse had occasioned the temporary
suspension of lamp-lighting along the entire twenty-five mile stretch of highroad between Bleak
Lynche and Haltmire. Nor did he know that Europe had returned from a course while he slept
and after a brief inquiry into his health, left again, quick on the trail of the surviving nickers.
How the young lighter wished she had been with them at Wormstool; what lives might have been
spared with the Branden Rose at the task.
As he slowly awoke, eyes heavy and senses murky, Rossamünd was gradually cognizant of a
figure looming at his side. In fright his senses became sharp and he sat up swiftly, pivoting on his
hands ready to jump, to run, to shout red-screaming murder. With clarity came truth and with
truth came the profoundest delight. It was Aubergene — his old billet-mate — sitting by
Rossamünd's recovery-bed on an old high-backed chair, dozing now as if he had been waiting at
the bedside a goodly while. Even as Aubergene's presence fully dawned on Rossamünd, the older
lighter snorted awake.
"Aubergene!" Rossamünd exclaimed. "Aubergene!"
"Ah, little Haroldus." The older lighter grinned, though sadness lurked at the nervous edges
of his gaze. "Dead-happy news to find you and the pretty lass hale! I've heard from the housemajor here how you won through. A mighty feat for young lighters."
Rossamünd swallowed a sob of relief. "I thought y-you were killed with the rest!"
Aubergene nodded leadenly in turn. "Aye, I suppose you would — but me and the undersergeant and Crescens Hugh were sent out with the deliveries for the Mama not so long after you
went off with Splint." He hesitated. "Poor Splint, poor Rabbit..." He put his chin in his hand.
"We weren't anywhere nigh the Stool when those wicked unmentionable baskets did their worst
there. We were still set on, though. We'd only just begun the return. Mama Lieger warned us
not to venture out again, but we figured she was just feeling for some comp’ny. Yet we weren't
more than half a mile gone when Hugh put his box on and, certain enough, kenned something odd
in the air and had us hurrying back to the Mama's seigh with a whole handful of the blightenedest
hob-boggers in chase."
Rossamünd listened with amazed relief, glad to hear that Mama Lieger was not to blame, glad
to know that some had won through that day. Yet these three fellows had survived in that small
high-house where the might of Wormstool had failed. "How — how did you live through it?"
"We tried our aim from the Mama's windows and hacked at ‘em by the door if they tried to
shimmy up, Mama Lieger laughing and shrieking like a soul gone mad, poking at the baskets with
this great long prod of hers." A strange, troubled thought suddenly haunted Aubergene's brow.

He looked to his right and hunched as if he was about to enter into a conspiracy. "Rossamünd,"
he said low and halting, "we — we was defended by other — by other bogles too."
A chill shivered down Rossamünd's scalp. His hearing whined. "You were defended by
monsters?"
Aubergene looked at him hard, almost aggressively, yet there was something pleading in his
brittle gaze; he seemed more troubled by what he had just said than by the destruction of his
billet-mates. "It's not sedorner talk, Rossamünd! I'm no bogger-loving basket — it's just what I
saw with the same eyes that look on you now..."
"You'll never hear me call you a sedorner, Aubergene," Rossamünd answered, an image of
Freckle flickering in his mind. "I know there are kindly monsters..."
The older lighter's dogged expression loosened. "Poesides warned Hugh and me about
speaking on it," he said in a grateful hurry, "but I reckon the Mama might be right about you,
Rossamünd, that you do see things more in her way; I reckoned you'd not begrudge me what we
witnessed," he finished, almost imploring Rossamünd to say it was so.
The young lighter gave a bemused, shrugging kind of nod. Rossamünd would never cast a
stone at the unusual revelations of another.
"I reckon them hob-possums fought for the Mama's sake," Aubergene continued. "Remember
that little doll you said winked at you?"
"Aye," Rossamünd barely dared a wheeze.
"Well, you were right! It was a beastie — some ween-some bogle-thing made of sticks and
bits that's been just there on the mantel all the while, and up it jumped, leaped out the Mama's
door without a pause and wrestled baskets dead-near ten times its bulk. Something else joined it
— we could scarce catch a sight of the fellow, but something heavy and all bristling beard came,
and with great crashings and flashes like some fulgarine. This new nicker set our enemies on a
run. I've never seen such a thing, never knew it was really so — just eeker talk, naught but
bewilderment and nonsense. When all was quiet, the Mama called out in her old tongue —
whether it was to her weeny bogle friend or bristle-beard or the birds themselves I could not
reckon. Either way, magpies began to sing as if in answer, getting loud, sounding for all the lands
like speaking — dead eerie and unhuman. The Mama became satisfied then and we were left in
peace." Aubergene looked out the window.
It was beginning to rain again, a pelting rat-a-tat on the mullions. Rossamünd found he had
almost forgotten such a merry sound after two months without.
"If nickers weren't enough" — the troubled man nodded toward the wet — "this storm set
itself against us and Poe daren't let us out till Hugh was sure we were clear. The Mama said she'd
have her ‘friends’ watch over us, but Poe refused her. The old dame shrugged at us all
contrariness and secrets, but Crescens never caught sight or smell of any escort."
"I am" — Rossamünd could not think of how to put his sad relief — "glad some of us have
survived, Aubergene..." he tried, feeling a little daft.
"Aye, though I sorely wish I were at the Stool to defend her, though your deadly feats near
won the day." The man looked to him with evident pride. "you earned your name aptly, I reckon,
Master Harold, smashing every nicker that crossed you — though I'm sure you were dead-glad to
have Lampsman Vey with you."
Rossamünd nodded. "She saved us both," he said softly. "But it was not enough to help the
— the others."
"No." Aubergene dropped his gaze. "No, I s'pose it weren't."
*

*

*

*

*

Two days later, the remains of their comrades were recovered, brought back to Bleakhall and
buried. Even the nonlighter folk of Bleak Lynche attended. Rossamünd had never attended an

obsequy before; any foundling who died was buried privately, just for Madam Opera and the
masters to see. Here, in the deepest cellars of Bleakhall, with the lighters gathered about, their
heads and his own covered over with black mourncloths, he was privy to the whole somber
process.
With every burial came the ritual intonation: "A light to your path. A way in the dark."
Rossamünd was surprised, even in his sorrow, by the smallness of the tombs and the
thoroughness with which they were sealed with plugs of clay once the corpse was interred. There
was something bitterly oppressive about this hurried, repetitious rite, the lives of the passing
grieved as a waste, their honor grimly asserted by House-Major Fortunatus and attested to by
silent, angry nods from the lighters, "Lampsman 2nd Class Fadus Theudas," the senior officer said,
"true of heart and quick of shot, who sought to serve, so young and so well."
"A light to your path. A way in the dark."
Blinking back tears, Rossamünd looked furtively to Threnody, standing across from him at
the memorial, and marveled that she and he had survived a theroscade together. The girl looked
haunted as they slid the remains into small tombs deep below, glancing reluctantly at him with
dark, imploring eyes.
"A light to your path..."
She was to be puncted that night. He had no desire to see her marked, for to do that would be
to relive the horror and violence — and he simply could not. Providentially, — when the time
came that evening — he was not made to attend.
*

*

*

*

*

After the burial day the young survivors were given light duties about Bleakhall, small tasks
to keep them from dangerous brooding.
Any unoccupied time Rossamünd and Threnody had they spent sitting together and talking in
the room given to him in the wayhouse.
"Rossamünd" — the girl lighter looked at him with sad earnestness, fingering the bandage
that covered her still-forming puncting — "how did you slay those monsters?"
"You were there, Threnody! I just did — I hit them and they died. Isn't that the way it is
meant to happen?"
"Yes... but Sp-Splinteazle was not able to even bruise one and he is — was thrice your size."
"Sequecious skewered at least one," Rossamünd tried. "Probably more!"
"A huge man using a blade coated in aspis. Did your crook have a venificant on it?"
"No." He had no other answer for this but the one he had already given the house-major.
Threnody squinted at him. "You catch heavy barrels and slay monsters with one blow."
Rossamünd had nothing to say to this.
A welcome silence stretched out.
"Will you go back to Herbroulesse now?" he asked eventually.
"And let Mother win?" Threnody scowled. "Never. I am a lighter now, like you, and we shall
serve on just as we ought. Once a lighter, always a lighter — isn't that what they say?"
"Aye... Maybe." Rossamünd could not conceive of what his future might be now. What little
enthusiasm for lighting he had managed to find had been slaughtered out at Wormstool. Between
the violent malice of monsters and the ruthless ambition of men, where was he to go?
*

*

*

*

*

A week after the attack they were talking quietly about unimportant things when Europe
entered Rossamünd's room, unannounced and without a knock. She had only now returned, and
looked haggard beneath her fine clothes and manners.
There was an uncomfortable hesitation.

With a resigned sigh, Threnody stood, bowed stiffly to the fulgar and left the room.
The lighter and the fulgar peered at each other, Europe's expression impenetrable.
Strange feelings boiled within Rossamünd's bosom, but most of all, with her there he felt truly
safe. Without thinking, he leaped from the bed where he had been sitting and flung his arms
about the fulgar.
Startled, she relented for a moment, hands placed lightly on his shoulders, but Rossamünd
could feel her gathering discomfort and, shamefaced and awkward, he let her go.
"I-I am glad you are safe," he stammered, feeling small and stupid. He sat back on the cot.
Europe nodded. "I know how funny you can get about a monster's dying," she continued
circumspectly, "so you may or may not be glad to hear that I have found and slain every hobthrush, botcher or gnasher I could."
She was right: Rossamünd did not feel any better for the news.
"That old eeker woman, Mother Lieger, even helped me — if you can credit that." Europe
pulled a wry face. "I must give part of my success to her guidance: she knew very well where the
baskets might be hiding at — and a girl will never refuse aid however it might come. Here is me
all along believing these foolish eeker-folk were in love with the nickers. Indeed, she even asked
me to send you her greetings, and tell you that she declares it a ‘terrible wicked thing to have
happened.’" She sighed a deep, heartfelt sigh. "Now the folk of Bleak Lynche want to fete me,
and the house-major wants to cite my deeds for some kind of Imperial commendation... I refused
them both, of course."
Rossamünd nodded sadly. "They wanted to give me a mark, but I refused them too."
Europe let out a small laugh. "Of course you did." She sat on the edge of the bed. "By the
way, I saw your glamgorn friend. It was loitering out there near the edges of the town and
keeping downwind of the dogs."
"You didn't do anything to him, did you?" Rossamünd sat up sharply.
"I cannot quite believe I am saying this but, no, I let the wretched thing be. I had little choice,
actually." She folded her hands in her lap. "Once it knew I was about, it left rather smartly."
Rossamünd lay back. "I feel so tired, Miss Europe. I don’t know why, but I cannot seem to
raise much eagerness for anything."
"I can tell you why, Rossamünd." Europe looked at him appraisingly. "You have stood
victorious in a desperate stouche. Dark moods always follow. Your potential as a factotum
increases almost every time I see you. Dear Licurius, in all his might, may well have struggled
where you have won."
"But all I did was survive!"
"I don't think you comprehend what you have done." Europe leaned toward him. "A wit,
even a clumsy, new-cut one, should be able to win through a pack of monsters, else what would
be the point of all the pain and inconvenience? But you, an ordinary little man, have not just won
through, but — from what I hear — beaten to death three knickers, full-formed and ancient."
Rossamünd hung his head. "I was not counting."
"No," the fulgar said, fixing him with serious eyes, "but others are."
*

*

*

*

*

The reply from the Marshal-Subrogat arrived two weeks after that horrid Dirgetide day. It
declared tersely that the circumstances of the sacking of Wormstool were too unusual for the
limited jurisdiction of the ignoble end of the road. It demanded that Rossamünd and Threnody
leave immediately on the return post, strangely omitting to summon Under-Sergeant Poesides or
Aubergene or Crescens Hugh the lurksman. They had not been witnesses to the fall of the
cothouse and were to stay and serve at Bleakhall until further directed from Winstermill. Having
stated this in the firmest terms, the dispatch went on to deny any immediate relief to the

beleaguered lighters of Bleakhall. The Master-of-Clerks did not see the wisdom in rushing men
into the fray when he knew so little of the current situation.
Under the escort of one of the scrutineers who had seen the aftermath, the two young lighters
were to be on their way, messengers of the tragedy and bearers of a second urgent request for
reinforcement.
Though Rossamünd knew Europe had gone again, hunting somewhere out on the flat with her
hired lurksman, he nevertheless looked out for her in hope, even up to the moment of departure.
Before boarding the return post, the young lighter left a desperate scrawl for her with Goodwife
Inchabald, a plea for the fulgar to follow after him to Winstermill. It was a lot to ask, but he was
about to return to the den of that black habilist Swill, and the Branden Rose was the only one who
he felt could protect him anymore.
In somber silence, the post-lentum left for the Idlewild proper, farewelled by only Aubergene,
sadly waving, and a silent Poesides. Not sparing of the horses, it hurtled west. What little was
left of their belongings Rossamünd and Threnody now carried with them in the cabin. All the rest
was charred to smithereens in the burning and collapse of his old billet — including, to
Rossamünd great woe, his peregrinate and the remarkable valise given him by Madam Opera.
Out of exhaustion and an unbearable gloominess at his enforced retreat to the manse,
Rossamünd slept much of the journey. The return became a bizarre blur of unhappy, cataclysmic
dreams; hurrying landscape glimpsed from the thin slot allowed between sash and door frame;
strange, anxious faces at whatever stop they made; and tasteless meals he had no appetite to
stomach. Threnody too sat in silent grieving, seeming diminished without her fine furs and
traveling bags.
Rossamünd lost the reckoning of time. All seemed dark to him, whether day or night; he
could have well done with House-Major Grystle's hack-watch now. Consequently he was unable
to share in the wonder of their escort, who stated that they had achieved Winstermill in a record
four days — rather than six — and "that done at the end of the bad traveling season and all!"
Four days, six days, ten days, twelve — this was no relief to the young lighter. He had once
gloried that he had escaped the oppressive, now-corrupted place, yet here he was, returning to the
manse after only two and a half short, violently terminated months.
Now he feared he might never be allowed to leave this den of massacars again.
Their arrival at Winstermill went unheralded, and from the coach yard they were met by
Under-Clerk Fleugh and hurried directly through the manse to wait with their escort in the
Marshal-Subrogat's anteroom.
"No happy welcomes for us, I see," Threnody muttered as they were let through to the Ad
Lineam, the hall-like gallery of tall, many-mullioned windows that took them to the Master-ofClerks' file, their feet slapping thump thump thump as they were hastened along.
As if there was some kind of criminal inconsistency to be found in their accounts, Podious
Whympre saw fit to meet with each of them separately. The Bleakhall escort was interviewed
first; this was a long meeting that gave the two young lighters time to catch a breath as they sat
under the impassive gaze of a foot guard.
"What do you think will happen?" Threnody wondered quietly.
"I don't know."
"What more can Odious Podious want to know?" she persisted.
"I don't care."
"Hmph." Threnody folded her arms and leaned back as best she might in the high-backed
chair.
Their escort reemerged looking harassed and disappointed.
Threnody was called next.
"Do well," Rossamünd offered. The encouragement sounded weak in his own ears.
"And you," she returned with a dazzling smile, and disappeared through the portentous door.

Finally, as the sun westered, shedding gold on the west-facing angles of the mess-hall window
frames, Rossamünd was shocked from his doze by a summons. His time with the clerk-master at
last. As he was let through to Podious Whympre's file, he could hear the tail of the previous
interview.
"In such startling and tragic circumstances," came the Master-of-Clerks' smooth voice, "I
have taken the liberty of sending for your mother."
"I do not want her here!" Threnody objected.
"But she is here already," Whympre returned evenly. "I shall have my man take you to her
immediately. Ah, Master Bookchild, our little teratologist! It would appear you have an
unfortunate aptitude for being right in the thick of troubles." The Master-of-Clerks glowered at
him almost as soon as Rossamünd entered the narrow, unfriendly room. "Thank you, Lady
Threnody. That will be all."
The girl pivoted on her heel, her nose in the air. They exchanged a quick look, Threnody
rolling her eyes and exiting without another word.
Rossamünd stepped into the Master-of-Clerks' file and stood at the far end of the great table
that ran most of the length of the room. The first thing he noticed was the enormous antler-trophy
of the Herdebog Trought, thrusting out into the upper atmosphere of the room. The trophy was
hanging from the wall as if it had been Podious Whympre himself who had bagged the beast.
Rossamünd gave a brief scowl of disgust. The musk of the horns cloyed the air in here, joining
the sweet fragrance of that old wood and the sharp bouquet of velvet and gold, with its too-high
ceilings of dainty white moldings, too-tall windows looking out to the treacherous fens north of
the manse. Its morbid silence hummed with distracting, lurking echoes. In the far-end wall,
underneath an enormous painting of some ancient Imperial victory, were three doors.
Remembrance made his gizzards tight as Rossamünd wondered which it was he had burst through
on the night he slew the rever-man.
The Master-of-Clerks sat tall and stiff, aloof in a great gilt chair at the farther end of the
ostentatiously carved table. Dressed in the brilliant scarlet of the Empire, he had removed his
thick black wig of long complex locks — an inconvenience when shuffling sheaves of paper. It
was also a subtle reminder that neither Rossamünd — nor Threnody, nor their escort for that
matter — were important enough to warrant the trouble of being fully dressed.
To the left of the clerk-master, seated on a markedly smaller stool of drab wicker, was
Witherscrawl, with stylus in hand and giant book on lap. The indexer scowled through his glasses
at Rossamünd, who could feel those beady eyes and ignored them. Laudibus Pile was there too,
of course, sitting just behind his master, leaning forward, ready to expose false speech.
Rossamünd refused to be daunted — he had nothing to hide.
"Please sit, Lampsman 3rd Class Bookchild," the Master-of-Clerks purred.
There was not much new about the interview itself. The same kinds of questions were asked
as he had been asked by the house-major of Bleakhall: the why, the where, the how — and
Rossamünd's answers were the same. Whympre kept pressing for more detail on just how the
young, prematurely promoted lighter had fought and beaten his foes. Rossamünd was troubled by
the inkling that there was more to the queries than simple, official inquisitiveness. Nevertheless
he answered every question truthfully.
"All this loss of life is very alarming and vexing." The Master-of-Clerks stroked his face and
looked anything but alarmed or vexed. Indeed, he seemed more troubled by the destruction of
property. The most significant thing he had to tell was that there was to be a formal inquiry of the
Officers of the Board into the affair, "to be held here, hence the brevity of this evening's factfinder. A disaster of this magnitude requires proper bureaucratic process." The man smiled
coldly. "Also, I wish to investigate some... irregularities. The people of the Idlewild, and the
Sulk End too, need to see that their Marshal-Subrogat is not a slouch as the important end of the
day — ad captandum vulgus and all that, you understand."

Actually Rossamünd did not understand. What irregularities? The events were
straightforward.
"I shall allow you a day or two to gather yourselves, after which we will begin, first thing on
the first day of the new week. Understood?"
"Aye, sir."
Shortly after, with his attention waning and sleepiness waxing, Rossamünd was dismissed.
He was led to a small room on the first floor of the manse, away from Threnody or any other
lighter. Missing mains, he lay on the foreign cot in the cold foreign room and slept.

28
Before The Inquiry
heldin(s) mighty folk of ancient history who fought with the monsters, employing their infamous therimoirs to
keep the eoned realms of humankind safe. Known by many collective titles, including beauts (common), haggedolim
(Phlegmish), herragdars (Skyldic), heterai (Attic), orgulars (Tutin), sehgbhans (Turkic), and what we would call
‘heroes’. The tune of their supremacy, when they were relied upon to stand in the gap between everymen and
üntermen, is known as the Heldinsage. Said to have begun with the Phlegms — those most ancient forebears — and
ended with the Attics, their heirs, it was the time of Idaho, the great queen of the Attics, and of Biargë the Beautiful,
among many other glorious and infamous folk and their usually tragic stories. Not all of the weapons of the heldins
were destroyed in the violent cataclysms that punctuated and finally concluded that time: many are said to remain,
and are most highly prized by collectors and combatants.

T

he next morning, gray and misty and eerily still, Rossamünd was already harnessed
when the ritual call came — "A lamp! A lamp to light your path!" Without stopping for
breakfast, Rossamünd went straight down to the Low Gutter, through the labyrinthine Skillions.
Kneeling over the deserted grate that led to Numps' desecrated bloom baths, the young lighter
called and called Numps' name till he was hoarse, but no pallid, welcoming, twisted face loomed
on the darkened steps below.
Rossamünd pulled on the grate and found it was locked.
He gave one last cry, and ran to the lantern store, looking dusty and seldom used, but the
glimner was not there either. Rubbing his face, Rossamünd tried to marshal his increasingly
anxious conjectures.
Doctor Crispus will know! To the infirmary he went, and found the physician working as he
always had, tending the few ill or wounded fellows there.
"Have you seen him?" Rossamünd pressed intently. "Is Mister Numps recovered from his
grief?"
"Cuts and sutures! No, I have not had sight of Numps, young Master Bookchild," the
profoundly startled Crispus replied. "And well betide you, young sir, all questions and no
greetings!" he added. "I had no notion you would ever be back with us!"
"Sorry, Doctor Crispus. Hallo, sir. I was just down in the Skillions looking for Mister
Numps."
The physician laughed, a tight nervous sound, and directed Rossamünd into his study. "All I
can confirm," he man said when the door was shut, "is that the astute fellow has take to living in
the damp cellars under our very feet. I put out food in his lantern store at the start of every week,
and each time I have returned to do it again, the previous parcels are gone. It seems a satisfactory
arrangement, though it probably cannot last. Nevertheless, I shall keep at it till events dictate
otherwise. And for you, my boy, why are you here? I heard of the terrible things done at
Wormstool. It does me great good to see you hale."
"The clerk-master has called Threnody and me back," he said, sitting upright and tense on the
seat Crispus offered him. "He says that the things that happened at Wormstool are too terrible not
to inquire after properly. He also says he wants to investigate ‘irregularities.’
"I am sure he does," Crispus exclaimed. "Guilty minds are suspicious minds."
"You received my letter, Doctor?"
"I did, my boy, I did." The physician stared at his well-ordered desktop for a moment.
"I sent the same to Mister Sebastipole," Rossamünd added, fishing out the letter from
Sebastipole and passing it over. "This was his reply."

Crispus took the missive and “hmmed” a lot as he read. "The gears of bureaucracy turn
against us, Master Bookchild," he said at last, waving the letter. "The most difficult thing in all of
this topsy-turvy hubble-bubble is proof."
"Have you discovered any, Doctor?"
"Regrettably, no," Doctor Crispus said flatly. "Our not-so-temporary Marshal has reversed
my position, and against all custom and decency that sawbones Swill is my superior: a surgeon
over a physician! I am not certain that it is even legal. But that is the lay on things, and
consequently my movements about the manse are severely restricted. So you and Mister
Sebastipole and I can wonder and surmise all we like, but like the leer says, it is all useless
without tangible proofs, and these noe of us in the position to obtain."
"Miss Europe says the same." Rossamünd's shoulders sagged. Then a bright idea struck.
"could find proof. I got into the cellars before, I can do it again."
"Lah! The boy is a heldin reborn!" Crispus exclaimed. "They cover their activity too well. If
Mister Sebastipole could not find evidence or even traces of the same, what hope have you with
your less cunning senses? No, no, no, Rossamünd. You are in things deep enough, I think!
Having said that, you should destroy this letter — their finding proof against us... against you...
would be terribly counteractive."
"How is it that we are not able to stop such clear wrong-doing?" Rossamünd said in
suppressed indignation.
"I am afraid, my boy, our foes are well ahead of us in the use and experience of cunning and
shrewdery," aid Crispus resignedly.
"But it can't be that they are allowed to go on making rever-men and ruining lives!"
"No, it cannot," the physician concluded softly. "No, it cannot," he repeated, and lapsed into
introspective silence.
Flummoxed, Rossamünd went silent too. Railing about the wretched situation did naught to
solve it. "The manse seems empty, Doctor," Rossamünd eventually observed.
"Joints and gristle, my boy," Crispus exclaimed, "this place has gone straight to blight after
that sis edisserum caper. All the best folk are leaving as fast as schemes will let them. Whympre
said something about Grindrod being overburdened by the rigors of learning prentices their trade.
The poor fellow has been sent on half pay to some other fort — I never did catch where — some
remote and difficult place. Benedict has taken his sweet little wife back to High Vesting."
Rossamünd could not believe his ears. Benedict gone? Grindrod disposed? The lamplightersergeant had seemed as permanent as the rock of Winstreslewe itself. "But who is drilling
prentices, then?"
"There are no more prentices," returned Crispus. "Master Whympre says that the road is in
too great a disarray for prenticing to continue. He says that after he has brought things back in
order and reformed the whole Wormway, the question of prentices will be addressed again."
"Who else has gone?" Rossamünd asked, saucer-eyed.
"Let me see..." The physician began counting off fingers. "As you know, that Mother Snooks
woman evaporated without a glimpse some months ago; I have heard some dreadful rumor that
she was declared mentally unsound and exiled to some terrible far-off place. Then there is that
amiable young register, Inkwill. He set off last week to some sinecure — a sweet-and-easy
station I believe the common roughs call it — in the bureaucracies of Brandenbrass, got for him
through a cousin, or so he said. The lurksman-general is seeking a position elsewhere. Most of
my epimelains have left; they said they would not work with that butcher at the lead — bless their
eyes. I have precious few like-minded fellows to converse with now, and a sore trial it is too, I
might say. If it were not for Numps, I might find a way to a new posting myself. Now let me
look you over." Crispus reached for a special monocle like Swill had worn when searching out
the calendar Pandomë's hurts. "It might be near on a month since you were in your fight, but I do
not trust Mister Trippletree" — by which he meant the dispenser at Bleakhall — "to have been
thorough enough."

While he was looked over, Rossamünd explained the many events that had crowded his life
since last he was in Winstermill, though he omitted any mention of Freckle. "...And all I hear,"
he concluded after a long telling, "is what a remarkable thing it was to have slain those nickers."
"Well, my boy, I cannot say that I blame them. To come out unscathed from one of the worst
assaults on a cothouse in recent history would be a most remarkable thing even for a fully formed
man. But fret not: the body is capable of remarkable deeds when the soul is under great pressure.
Now, Rossamünd, you look fit enough, though I think you need to eat more."
So, with morning transformed to midday, Doctor Crispus invited Rossamünd to share
middens.
"Ahh." Crispus waxed cheerful as the food was brought in by silent maids. "Middens is a
meal not to be missed! One can go without breakfast, and a missed mains won't do you harm, but
to skip middens" — he clucked his tongue rapidly — "that is to risk a sluggish and interminable
afternoon."
Rossamünd basked in the physician's dependable unflappability.
There was a tench pie, boiled leg o’ veal, carrot collique peas with a great wedge of butter
melting on them and sweet wine jelly for puddings — like a Domesday feast, served right in the
physician's study. In this prandial refuge they talked a little about lighter things, but mostly they
ate in heavy, ruminative silence.
The meal approached its end and Doctor Crispus pushed back his chair and, with a show of
sangfroid, said, "Don't fuss about Numps, my boy. Together we just might preserve the poor
fellow from further harassments." He sucked down the last of his tepid syllabub with a clear yet
dignified snort and said, "Back to the coughs and croaks and running sores for me, my friend.
Nights can be as long as days for one in my line of work: several wounded lighters have been
sent to me from beyond the Tumblesloes. They did not do as well as you against the bogles, but
are not beyond repairing. Good day to you, Master Bookchild, until anon."
Standing to bow, Rossamünd bid the physician good afternoon and left, spirits lifted, pleased
to have such an estimable man of physics call him friend.
*

*

*

*

*

Rossamünd spent confinations alone in his tiny room. In the afternoon he had gone back to
the Low Gutter to seek Numps, but still to no avail. After this he made an attempt to meet with
Threnody, but she was now closeted with her mother and was refusing all visitors. She had not
been hard to find: he simply asked Under-Clerk Fleugh, who, though sneering and supercilious,
told him without hesitation. Even as he approached down the dark, aromatic passage, he could
hear the rumor of a terrible ruckus. It became a terrible female screech as the door of Threnody's
apartment was opened to his knock.
"You shall tell everything as you saw it, child," is what it sounded like, coming from some
other room father within.
Before him at the door stood Dolours. She wore a wimple to cover her bald pate and a
dogged expression. "Hello, young lampsman. Threnody will not be taking any callers today."
"Our clave has no liars!" the screeching continued behind. "How would we look to others if it
were known my daughter — the Right's heiress — was a black-tongued deceiver?"
"Not even me?" Rossamünd had persevered.
"Not even you, young lampsman," Dolours had answered with a sad and not unfriendly smile.
"She is being prepared for tomorrow's inquiry. Be on your way, Rossamünd Bookchild. We are
grateful for your aid to our senior sister's daughter, but bigger wheels are turning here."
Lying on his lumpy, lonely bed, he worried over this odd display. Will she tell of Freckle?
The chilling thought froze his innards. Flicking disconsolately through an old pamphlet to
distract him from such inconvenient anxieties, he heard a call come for him. "Lampsman
Bookchild, you are required by the Marshal-Subrogat!"

What now! Rossamünd fretted as he was taken to the Master-of-Clerks's file. Is the inquiry
coming early? Is it canceled? Are they letting us go? All sanguine hopes, he was sure. Arriving,
he closed his eyes and took a deep breath and readied himself to face the foe. The doors swung
back and he saw Whympre, sitting at his usual place at the far end of the long table, within the
light of the only lamp lit in the room. He was apparently on his own for the only time Rossamünd
could ever recall, until the young lampsman saw that there were shadowy figures in the gloom,
standing about halfway down the clerk master's long table beneath the Trought's great antlers.
Did he know these figures?
With a great, weird, leaping exultation he realized he was staring straight at Fransitart and
Craumpalin, his old masters, the former stiff and steady, the latter fidgety and trying not to be.
They had come, as they said, all the way from Boschenberg, even though it was the worst time for
traveling. It was so utterly strange to see them there, his two worlds — old and new —
overlapping. Rossamünd was struck dumb.
On seeing him, Craumpalin made to hurry down to greet him, yet was halted by a subtle hand
of Fransitart's.
"Ah-ha, Lampsman Bookchild!" the Master-of-Clerks almost cried in disingenuous eagerness,
clearly making a kindly show of it for Rossamünd's old masters. "You have visitors, see: your
old wardens come to offer you succor in these darkest of days."
Rossamünd blinked at the man. "Thank you, sir," he managed.
"Hullo there, lad," said Master Fransitart huskily, his hard face made soft by the dampness in
his soulful eyes. Rossamünd realized he had near forgotten the once-so-familiar face. "We were
about on our ways to Wormstool but heard ye'd returned unexpected. We understand troubles are
athwart yer hawse."
Nearly bursting into tears, Rossamünd wrestled with the knot in his throat. "H-Hallo, Master
Fransitart. Hallo, Master Craumpalin."
"‘Ello, my boy." The old dispensurist grinned through his white beard.
"I have allowed them to join with you in the prentice's mess hall for a light supper before
douse-lanterns." The Master-of-Clerks did a brilliant simulation of the kindly host.
Mercy of mercies, Podious Whympre let them eave promptly, and the promise of a late meal
was actually honored. Left alone in his tiny accommodation, the reunited finally gave expression
to truer feelings as Rossamünd threw himself into Fransitart's arms. He buried his face in the
rough weave and old, unique scent of his dormitory master's cheap proofing. The mildly startled
ex-mariner cooed, "There, there, me hearty" several times till the young lighter loosened his hold.
Craumpalin fussed and exclaimed, "Look at thee! All bones like a mouse in a miser's kitchen.
What, don't they feed thee, lad?"
"Why are you here so soon?" Rossamünd voice wobbled. "Your letter said you would to be
here till... till..."
"Till now, lad," Fransitart said gently. "And we're actually late. It took some organizin', but
finally there was naught else for us to stay for, no marine society, no — no children to look after
with ‘em all new safe at other places..."
"And no Madam to employ us neither," Craumpalin added solemnly.
Rossamünd did not know what to say about Madam Opera. There had been little warmth
between them. Still, she had done more than many ever would in the aid of the ‘undeserving,’
even if her labors lacked motherly sentiments.
"A fine woman," the dispensurist murmured. "Not the friendliest, but fine an’ upstandin’!"
He raised a mug in silent salute.
Fransitart did the same, and they bumped mugs together.
"And now we're loose-footed." Craumpalin chuckled stoutly. "Just like afore all this settling
down to care for were babbies. Roll on them old days!" He looked meaningfully to Fransitart,
and Rossamünd became aware of a great weight of history between the two. Here, when he

thought them so very familiar, they were revealing parts of themselves to which he was a
stranger.
"Old days indeed." Fransitart frowned. "And thankee to yer Marshal fellow for our ales!"
"Don't be tricked by that trickster, Master Fransitart," Rossamünd warned. "He is the most
cunning basket of them all."
His two old masters blinked at him in surprise.
"I do believe the lad's filling out his baldric nicely, Frans." Craumpalin winked. "Don't be
troublin' thyself, Rossamünd, we know hay from straw; caught sight o’ his colors right quick, di’n
we, Frans?"
"That we did, Pin — a regular lamb-clad wolf is he."
"Aye aye, enough to make they meat crawl," the old dispensurist agreed. He looked sourly at
the food before them. "Blight and blast me, these wittles are uncommon bland!"
Rossamünd did not care how tasteless or unsatisfactory the food was, he was all a-joy to be
safe with his masters. Yet while they ate together and the first enthusiasm receded a little, he
became aware of an unfamiliar awkwardness.
Determined to enjoy their company, Rossamünd launched into the most full and hearty
recounting of his life since leaving Madam Opera's. Describing the fight with the rever-man, he
made direct connection with Swill, expressing his suspicions as part of the tale. Sorrow of the
ruination of Wormstool flooded out like relief. He even talked a little of Freckle too; of the
Hogshead and the wood near Wormstool; of the sparrows and Cinnamon, and especially of
Europe and Numps. His masters listened to it all in utter silence, a sign of respect, till he was
done. It felt so good to have out with the whole tale, start to end and all the in betweens. When
he had finished, a great weight had lifted from his shoulders.
"This Miss Europe lassie sounds like an uncommon remarkable woman," Craumpalin
enthused. "I remember her mentioned in thy letters."
"I was alarmed to hear ye conjecturin’ about yer surgeon bein’ a dastard, naught-good
massacar!" said Fransitart.
"Oh, aye, Master Fransitart! And that Podious Whympre fellow is right in it with him!"
"What's this place comin' to?" Craumpalin growled. "Why ain't he in hand with the
authorities then?"
"Doctor Crispus knows, and Mister Sebastipole and I reckon the old Lamplighter-Marshal
does too, but there is nothing any of them think they can do about it." Rossamünd spoke quickly
in his frustration. "About the only one who could do something is Miss Europe, and she says let
them choke on their own rope."
"Always the way with them lahzars." Fransitart shook his head. "Crotchety and crosswards.
Still, her notion has wisdom."
"What have we sent the lad into, Frans?" Craumpalin exclaimed. "We've got to get thee away
from ‘ere, Rossamünd!"
"And I would go with you, Master Pin, but that I made an oath to serve as a lighter and I've
been paid the Billion."
"Aye, right ye are, Rossamünd." Fransitart smiled his approbation. "We raised ye ‘onorable
and that way ye should stay. It's a difficult task to stay faithful beyond endurance. We'll figure a
loose for this impossible-seemin' knot yet."
"Aye aye!" Craumpalin added. "Might be possible to get thee an acquittance."
"An acquittance, Master Craumpalin?"
"Aye, an all-encompassing, all-official release from bound service. Prodigious handy."
Fransitart nodded. In a firm hush he said, "And did I hear ye right when ye spoke of that
Freckle fellow that ‘e's a bogle?"
Rossamünd felt a guilty leap in his belly. "Aye, he's... he's a — glamgorn."
"Thee what?" Craumpalin exclaimed, spitting some ale.
"He helped me—" he added quickly, "more than once."

"Do others know ye ‘ave been talkin’ with this were thing?" asked Fransitart. "To be talkin’
civil with a bogle is a sedorning offense, Rossamünd. They can gibbet ye for that! I know we
taught yer to use yer own intellectuals, but speakin' with a nasty bain't quite where I thought ye'd
take me advice."
"Sorry, Master Fransitart," Rossamünd squeaked.
"Once said is done," the master said, sighing deeply. "Whatever happens to ye from here on,
lad, Master Pin and I'll be right by ye."
"Too right!" agreed Craumpalin.
They continued their meal, Rossamünd losing his appetite to worry.
"Master Fransitart? Master Craumpalin?"
"Aye, lad," the two said together.
"Freckle said some prodigious things to me."
"What manner o’ things?"
"That he could tell what I am by my name.
Fransitart and Craumpalin looked blank at this.
"That people were my friends who would not be my friends if they knew... knew something,"
Rossamünd pushed on. "That I was safer with him. That he wanted to take me to the Duke of
Sparrows."
The two old salts became glassy-eyed, the kind of expressionlessness that hid deeper
workings.
"Such is one half of the trouble ye get from talkin' to bogles," Fransitart reflected soberly.
"They rarely make sense."
"You’ve spoken to bogles, Master Fransitart?" Rossamünd peered at the man in
astonishment.
"Aye, lad. And this is the first time I've said on it."
"Miss Verline once wrote me that you had something to tell me. Something not for letters but
for ears alone." Rossamünd tried, thinking this must have been that something.
The old dormitory master went a gray color Rossamünd had never seen him go before. The
two old salts swapped meaningful glances and the awkwardness, instead of dissolving, got worse.
"Well, that I did," Fransitart said slowly through a mouthful of salt pork, "and... and bless ‘er
for lettin’ ye know."
"Are they the same strange and shocking things you wanted to tell me before I left?"
Rossamünd pressed.
"Aye, they just might be." Fransitart chose his words carefully. "Be that as it might, though I
have yer ears ‘ere to hear." He leaned in. "Ye know we've always sought yer best, aye, lad?"
"Aye, Master Fransitart."
"That Master Pin and I have worked only for what we reckoned as right for ye, aye?"
Craumpalin nodded in emphasis.
"Aye, sir. Rossamünd frowned, baffled.
"Well, trust us that when it's time for telling, then that'll be th’ time we'll tell ye. Aye?"
Rossamünd nodded. He could not fathom what manner of despicable revelation his old
master knew that made him so reluctant. Either way he knew he would not get any more on this
from his old masters tonight.
The three ate and looked at each other uncomfortably for a time, but talk gradually returned to
happy things: to tales of the old vinegaroons' long-gone adventures together at sea; to fond
memories of marine society days — whatever it required to lift them and bring them close again.
Rossamünd could have stayed forever in that cozy, happy womb of cheer and love. Anything to
smother the growing dread.

29
A False Falseman
Imperial Secretary highest ranked of all the Haacobin Empire's bureaucrats; men and women of great influence
and power, not so much because of their own rank, but because of the status of the ears and minds they have such
ready access to — the senior ministers of the Emperor, and even the great man himself. The favor of an Imperial
Secretary can be the making of you: disfavor your ruin. Though often of common birth, they are typically courted
and feted by peers, especially the lowly ranked, and by gentry and magnates too, eager for some kind of advancement
or boon. One does not strive to be an Imperial Secretary for dreams and hopes of reform, but for the sake of pure
ambition and ego.

T

he morning of the inquiry after a brief wash and short breakfast, Rossamünd was led to
the offices of the subrogate-marshal between two foot-guards, like a prisoner. Fransitart and
Craumpalin went with him, heads high and dignified, vinegaroons of tested worth in support of a
worthy mate. They were recognized as interested parties on Rossamünd's side and as such were
allowed to sit with him during the questioning.
Within Whympre's file Rossamünd was surprised to find more people gathered than he had
expected. Dismayed, he scrutinized the lofty folk sitting at the far end of the table. It was a
tribunal of men, ready and waiting, most ignoring the young lighter before them as
inconsequential fluff. This tribunal comprised foremost the Master-of-Clerks, preeminent in the
central position. Upon his right was indexer Witherscrawl, a pen ready in each hand and two
ledgers open before him, acting as his assistant and glaring at Rossamünd for no good reason at
all. Next to him was the General-Master-of-Labors assisted by the Surveyor-of-the-Works — two
of Whympre's chief cronies. In the shadows of the far corner behind the young lighter. Most
astounding and disconcerting of all, sitting impassively at the Master-of-Clerks's left, was an
Imperial Secretary, distinct in shaven head and coattails of clerical black. His role was as an
independent eye, yet this was probably the very same esteemed personage under whose support
the Master-of-Clerks had blossomed.
To the right of these — as Rossamünd saw it — on a chair to the side of the Board sat
Surgeon Grotius Swill, the official adviser for any inquiries on physics, picking at lint on his
breeches. Rossamünd knew this was rightly the task of Doctor Crispus, but he was not present.
Halfway down the left side of the table sat Laudibus Pile, designated the inquisitor, and assisted
by Fleugh, the under-clerk, already scribbling away in a ledger. Rossamünd's innards gave a
painful, sick twist. Anyone without an intimate knowledge of the workings and the personalities
of Winstermill would think this collection of officers and bureaucrats before them a worthy and
impressive bunch. But from Rossamünd's view it was a tribunal stacked against his favor.
As Fransitart and Craumpalin took their seats behind him at the back of the room, Rossamünd
caught a flash of deep magenta silk in the corner behind. He turned. There was Europe, legs
crossed, an easy expression on her face; she was making a grand entrance into his life again, even
while she simply sat, serene.
"Hello, little man," she said smoothly. "We meet in some of the most peculiar circumstances,
don't you think?"
"But how—"
"Quiet, please," came the Master-of-Clerks' tight call.
Rossamünd's old masters looked from the fulgar to Rossamünd and back, Craumpalin
nodding toward her as if to say, "Is that her? "
As Rossamünd took his place at the end of the table, there was a rustling and hustle as the
Lady Vey proceeded into the hall, attended by Dolours, a gloomy-looking Threnody and

Charllette in full mottle-and-harness: all four women — even Threnody — wore wings and high
hats and bright-patterned bossocks, a startling display of their unity. Threnody was a lighter no
longer. With some fussing, the Lady Vey and Charllette took their places on the right side of the
table opposite Laudibus Pile. With Dolours joining Fransitart, Craumpalin and Europe at the
back, Threnody sat at Rossamünd's right hand. He tried to catch her eye, but she refused to look
at him.
Clearing his throat loudly, Witherscrawl stood and called the room to order, introducing each
member of the tribunal to the other, calling it collectively a “Board of Officers.” He paid
particular honors to the Imperial Secretary, naming him Secretary Imperial Scrupulus Sicus. The
alert-looking official stood and gave a gracious bow to the Master-of-Clerks, to the Lady Vey,
Dolours, and then, almost as an afterthought, to Europe, far down the other end of the room.
To Rossamünd it very much appeared like boys playing at "Lords and Magnates," a child's
game of grandiloquence and false civility.
Introductions done, it was now Pile's turn. "Secretary Imperial Sicus. Marshal-Subrogat
Whympre," he began, standing and pacing into the broad oblong gap between all the various
tables. "We have done our preliminaries regarding the occurrence of the assault on His Serene
Highness' Imperial Cothouse of Wormstool not two weeks gone. The purpose of this inquiry is to
lay out what we have found, Mister Secretary, and derive conclusions for the satisfaction of all."
He took a pause. "First I shall begin with the Lady Threnody of the Columbines of Herbroulesse,
who served briefly with us as a lampsman 3rd class, m'lady." Pile bowed to Threnody, all snide
and obscure sarcasm, his tone hovering expertly on the divide between deference and offense.
Threnody sat a little stiffer.
Pile began. "You were present at Wormstool Cothouse during the attack on the twenty-third
of Herse, correct?"
"Yes." Threnody frowned. "I arrived back there after restocking a stone-harbor with
Rossamünd and Splinteazle."
"By which you mean Lampsman 3rd Class Bookchild — present here, and Seltzerman 2nd
Class Splinteazle — who sadly died at the attack of which we speak, yes?"
"Yes."
"How did Seltzerman 2nd Class Splinteazle die?" Pile rocked on his heels with deliberate
gravity.
Threnody hesitated. "He was torn to death by a pack of brodchin and other nickers."
"And did you and Lampsman 3rd Class Bookchild do all that you could to save him?"
Rossamünd shifted in his seat. Of course we tried to save him!
"Yes, leer, we did," Threnody returned coldly. "Rossamünd—"
"You mean Lampsman 3rd Class Bookchild," the Master-of-Clerks interrupted.
The girl went quiet for a moment, to prove her displeasure at the man's rudeness. "Yes, who
would be Rossamünd." She waited to be corrected again. "He was in a better place to help
Splinteazle and fought most vigorously, while I had my own gnashers to confront."
"And why did Lampsman 3rd Class Bookchild fail to save the unfortunate seltzerman?" Pile
asked softly.
Are they trying to blame poor Splinteazle's end on me?
"He didn't fail at anything." Threnody scowled. "The beasts were too quick, and
overpowered Splinteazle before Rossamünd could help. He threw a blaste at the beasts to hinder
them, but it was not enough to stop them all."
"So Lampsman 3rd Class Bookchild did his utmost, but Seltzerman 2nd Class Splinteazle was
overwhelmed regardless, correct?"
"Correct."
"So how is it that this undergrown child" — the leer indicated Rossamünd — "was able to
best a nicker that a hardened veteran seltzerman could not?"
Threnody shrugged. "He's stronger than he looks, I suppose."

"Stronger...?" Laudibus Pile looked genuinely intrigued. "How do you know this?"
"I've seen him catch a butt of musket balls that should have crushed him flat," the girl
returned easily, as if this was nothing."
"And..."
Threnody gave a small cough. "Because I watched him kill a monster. But that event is plain
enough," she added quickly. "You don't need me to tell you of it."
Pile's shrewd eyes narrowed. "Indeed." Apparently careless, he picked at some spot or make
upon his soutaine. "Yet tell me... m'lady, do not these events strike you as unusual, almost
impossible?" The leer looked piercingly at her with his all-seeing eyes.
Threnody cast an anxious glance toward her mother.
The Lady Vey was sitting more stiffly than ever, looking not at her daughter but directing her
brittle gaze at the wall between two windows.
"I suppose they do," the girl said in a small voice Rossamünd had never heard her use before.
"You suppose they do? Hmm... Is what she says true, Lampsman Bookchild?" Pile asked,
looking to his palm as if the question were a trifling thing.
The young lighter shied. "Ah... Y-yes..."
Murmurs from the observers.
Rossamünd did not know what else to say. What was the use in dissembling? With this
false-hearted falseman his questioner, who would people believe? Such a fellow in command of a
room could do anything with the truth; with no other telltale present, no one could credibly
challenge him.
"Of Lady Threnody's part in the battle, her success is clear: a wit, however young, fighting
off a beastie is perfectly proper, and this young peer should be commended as the bravest and best
of her clave. Maybe it is only me who is bemused by this, but elucidate for me — if you are able,
Lampsman 3rd Class — how a mere lad of your slight stature manages to defeat a man's share of
nickers! How does one so small win through unharmed, where a cothouse-full of the Emperor's
own was bested and slain?"
Rossamünd had no answer. It was a fair question: he wondered it himself.
"I agree with you, Master Leer," interposed the Master-of-Clerks, that this is highly irregular."
"Thank you, sir." The leer spoke smoothly, in an even, convincing voice. "Give me your
answer, Lampsman."
Rossamünd obeyed. "I-I don't rightly know, sir."
Pile seemed to be smirking. "M'lady Threnody of Herbroulesse, is there anything else about
Lampsman Bookchild's manner you would describe as irregular?"
Despite the firm set of her jaw, Threnody went pale.
"There is nothing to be hidden here, m'lady," Laudibus Pile purred, his disconcerting eyes
daring a contradiction to his honeyed voice. "This is but an inquest into the whys and wherefores,
for the sake of the record."
The calendar looked to her mother again.
The Lady Vey just glowered meaningfully.
Threnody looked at Rossamünd again, her expression confused and intention unclear.
"And, m'lady?" Pile persisted, completely undaunted.
With a deep breath she said, "He wears a bandage soaked in a kind of nullodor around himself
all the time."
Pile pursed his lips. "Surely an odd and unnecessary habit?"
"He does it only for the sake of his old foundling masters," Threnody insisted.
"I see." The leer set his cunning attention on Fransitart and Craumpalin. "How the count of
oddities increases."
The two old salts stared back angrily.
Swill shifted in his seat stroking his mustachios thoughtfully, and regarded Rossamünd and
the two retired vinegaroons closely.

"Is it not also true — as the report I have declares," Laudibus Pile continued, looking like a
hungry dog, "that this young fellow refused to be puncted even after such a great feat as done at
the Imperial Cothouse of Wormstool? Would you not also call such a refusal — so dishonoring
the memories of the fallen — odd, my dear?"
Threnody's mouth stayed shut. With a brief glare at the leer, she fixed her attention
stubbornly on the wall before her.
"I can see that you know it to be very much the case." Pile tapped his cheek just below one of
his red-blue orbits. "So you might as well just speak out those things you cannot hide... Or may I
take it that by your silence" — Pile scratched his nose daintily to hid his subtle, goading
expression — "you think it right for the courageous dead to be dishonored?"
The Lady Vey bridled, her seat moving with a clatter of chair legs on hard, polished floor. "I
will not tolerate my daughter's being accused of dishonor, sir!"
Pile turned his cold, unnerving eyes to the august. "Maybe she might be free of such an
accusation if she ceased hedging for this fine fellow " — he pointed dismissively to Rossamünd
— "and told this esteemed panel fully what I can clearly tell she knows!"
"Have a care, sir," the Lady Vey warned, soft and low. "Now speak, my dear," she demanded
of her daughter, "and let this ridiculous fiasco come to its end!"
Threnody darted a look to her mother. "There is nothing more to say, Mother," she said, a
darkly victorious look growing in her eye. "Rossamünd is no more odd than any other in this
ridiculous inquiry."
Laudibus Pile puffed his chest and lifted his haughty head. "I am a thrice-proven telltale in
the Emperor's Service," he declaimed with quiet, frosty arrogance, "under charge of our Serene
Highness' most humble minister, the Marshal-Subrogat. My eyes see true, and I say to you,
young peerlet, that that is an utter and thorough-going lie! "
The Lady Vey rose, crying her disapproval. "How dare you, sir!" That is twice now you
slander her; there shall not be three! I will not hesitate to use my privileges to make my
displeasure felt on you, leer. Blast your eyes to flinders! If my daughter says there is no more,
then — by the foul depths — that is the end of the matter!"
"If you wish your daughter free from slander, madam," Pile seethed, his façade failing, "then
you should have schooled her better in honesty!"
"Please, Laudibus!" interjected the Master-of-Clerks. There was genuine alarm in his voice,
yet that predatory look never left his eye. "I am most positive this fine young peeress would not
dream of soiling her clave's honor by obfuscating truths or uttering falsehoods in a properly
convened Imperial Inquest. Our good Lady Vey has indeed taught her too well." He smiled
winningly at the august. "Is this not correct, Madam August?"
The Lady Vey looked at him proudly, her own chin in the air. She cleared her throat ever so
softly — a subtle, female threat.
"My exulted madam," Pile said with wounded dignity, bowing most humbly, "I merely seek
the truth, and if my zeal for it has offended your person I apologize."
Imperial Secretary Sicus raised a hand. "Falseman Pile, I thank you," the vaunted clerk
declared regally. "You have sought your trail as far as it might take you, but I warn you now to
let it go. We cannot have these gracious ladies harried so."
Rossamünd heard Threnody give a scornful sniff.
"Most Honorable Secretary!" The leer faced him and clasped his hands piously. "One might
be tempted to disregard any of these on their own as either minor offenses or just an
idiosynchrasy, sir. Yet when so many irregularities find themselves embodied in one soul, my
intuitions and insights as a falseman start to tell a darker story." Laudibus Pile pointed to
Rossamünd . "There he sits, Master Secretary, with his face so po, but is it possible hit solemn
young toad hides a wicked treachery? Is it possible that this apparent servant of the Emperor is in
league with the knickers, that he survived because of this league, and not through some act of
individual prowess? That is why he wears a nullodor al the time — to mark himself out to his

nickerly friends! He killed them only for a show, and this is why he refused a mark! I say to you,
Master Secretary, surely this one is a wicked sedorner! Surely it is he who, with his monster
friends, orchestrated the attack on Wormstool! Surely that is why he survived!"
Rossamünd gritted his teeth against a sudden fury within. So this was their game — to accuse
him a sedorner and shuffle him off to the gallows. He almost sprang to his feet.
"So I must ask you, most honored Master Secretary," the leer said, bowing low and long, "that
I forthwith be allowed to examine Lampsman 3rd Class Bookchild, so getting to the root of this
tragedy."
Imperial Secretary Sicus stood, hand still lifted in placation. "This is a most serious charge.
It is most persuasively put, and I thank you, Mister Pile; yet I believe I shall continue the inquiry
from here."
The leer bowed, his mien unreadable.
The Master-of-Clerks did not look best pleased, and surreptitiously have an unhappy look to
the leer.
Secretary Sicus turned his powerful attention to Rossamünd. "What is your answer to this
charge, Lampsman 3rd Class? You have been accused a sedorner, lad. What say you?"
Before the young lighter could open his mouth, Grotius Swill, calm and calculating, stood, a
hand raised. "If I may interject on proceedings, good sirs!" the surgeon inquired politely. "I have
been listening now to these most troubling details, and I declare to you esteemed officers of the
table that a possibility yet more disturbing has revealed itself to my thoughts. I ask your
indulgence to pursue my own inquiries." He bowed low to the collected personages seated at the
long table.
The Master-of-Clerks nodded, all pomp and smugness, covering his surprise at the
interruption. "Indeed, dear surgeon, you are our eminent physical man here. Let us take a brief
recess for breaths to catch and mids to clear."
The room was emptied but for Rossamünd. Even Europe went, leaving him to worry alone on
what terrible revelations might follow. Pile had already claimed he was a sedorner — a claim, in
truth, he could not deny. What other crimes was Swill to lay upon him?

30
Quo Gratia
libermane potive used to prevent the cruor of a monster from clotting too quickly as it is stored in a bruicle.
Useful as this is, it also affects the quality of the blood, thinning it and making the cruorpunxis it is used for pale, less
distinct. Therefore libermane is used only when teratologists believe they are more than a couple of days' journey
from a punctographist. Another function of libermane is its application on swords, knives and other blades of war, to
make a wound flow more than it ought, though by the Accord of Menschen this practice is deemed unacceptable in
modern conflict.

H

onorius Ludius Grotius Swill peered about at the many personages who had reconvened
in the clerk-master's file. "It may be that when I first declare the notion that has occurred to me,"
he began, "you shall think it a mad genius-leap, so I ask you, gracious Officers of the Board, to
please bear with me. The full play of my thoughts will clarify if I am given the time." He cleared
his throat histrionically, giving Rossamünd an odd look from the corner of his eye. "Officers of
the Board, paritous inquisitor, peers, ladies, gentlemen, I have listened this whole morning to the
witness of these two young Imperial servants — listened long and keen — and what I have heard
troubles me greatly. However, one question vexes me over all others. What truly does all this
evidence point to, and how is it such a runty... lad might do such feats as he has done?" He
pondered a moment, a fine act to focus people's attention upon him. "In view of an answer, if I
may I would like to address the whole room with this question: how many of you have heard of
Ingébiargë? Perhaps you know her as Biargë the Beautiful?"
The Master-of-Clerks and Scrupulus Sicus, the Imperial Secretary, nodded.
The Lady Vey made a face as if to say, What does it matter if I have or have not?
No one else indicated either way.
Rossamünd knew of Ingébiargë. Craumpalin had told him of her more than once. She was
meant to be a cannibalistic woman living in the remotest coasts of the Hagenlands who, by
forgotten habilistics, had kept herself alive many thousands of years and made prey of any who
passed too near. Such an unnatural length of life had apparently twisted her: she was grayskinned, with red and yellow eyes more terrible than any leer's.
"Some of you might dismiss this Ingébiargë as a fiction, but any vinegaroon who has sailed
east beyond the Mare Periculum through the Beggar Sea, or harbored in the roadstead off the
Stander Lates near Dereland's western shores, will tell you she is a very real and factual danger.
If we could ask a mariner of one thousand years gone of her, he too would give the same ghastly
report."
The normally indulgent Master-of-Clerks, most likely aware of Secretary Sicus sitting
immediately to his right, started to show impatience at this bizarre divagation.
The surgeon lifted his hands appeasingly. "Now please, sirs, attend to me, I do have a point.
Ingébiargë, the great abomination, the shame of the Hagenards, known as an ever-living
monstrous everyman — or woman." He corrected himself with a peculiar look to the calendars
and Europe. "Yet she is not the only one. The obscurest corners of history will reveal the
occurrence of other such abominations, though most, when discovered, were destroyed before
they could become the terrible canker Ingébiargë is to southern shipping to this day. For this
Biargë is not some clever skold, as some might reckon, but rather a manikin — a monster in the
shape and form of a person, and as such more assuredly an abomination."
Fransitart had become a wan gray.
Craumpalin had a haunted glimmer in his eye.

"Pray, Surgeon Swill, you must bring us to your point of view, sir — the morning runs long,"
purred the Master-of-Clerks, a hint of chill in his voice, though he never let slip his patient façade.
"Most certainly, Marshal-Subrogat." The surgeon bowed a third time to the Officers of the
Board and went on as if he had not been interrupted. "But how can such a wicked abomination
happen? I see the question clear on your corporate faces: how can a monster be found in the
form of an everyman? As you are all well familiar, we know so little of the where and the why of
the monsters, of how they perpetuate themselves. What we do know is that most teratologica
survive so long they can be considered — as the short generations of men reckon it — to live
forever. Yet the monsters do replace their numbers. We know some repeat themselves, budding
like so many trees, dropping bits of themselves to grow into replicas of the original. This can be
most commonly observed in the draulschwimmen of the mares or the vicious brodchin of the
wildest lands such as the Ichormeer or Loquor."
Here Swill paused, took a breath.
An awful, sick sensation was blossoming in Rossamünd's gut.
Everyone expectant, the surgeon poured himself some wine from a sideboard, drank it all and
continued.
"But what we have never seen is the creation work of the ancient gravid slimes, those places
said to have been the nurseries of the earliest monsters, the eurinines — the first monster-lords —
and used by them in turn to bring forth the lesser types of the theroid races." As he went on, a
quaver of fervent enthusiasm entered the surgeon's voice. "Some of you might even know the
history that was before history, the rumors of the beginnings; that these eurinines were granted by
the clockwork of the universe to be able to put forth their threwd and make the muds fertile.
Heated by the sun, worked on by the threwd, the very ground was made womblike and would pop
to bring forth from the foul cesspits of the cosmos many of the worst and most notorious of the
monsters that still stalk this groaning world today."
Rossamünd did have some small understanding of the things said, but he had never heard the
most ancient of histories put so directly. If he had not been in such a great anxiety, he would have
eagerly listened to Swill wax learned like this for hours.
Wiping his mouth, Grotius Swill took up the cause once again. "Now these gravid muds
continued to be used by the monster-lords, even through the rise and fall of ages, whereby they
take the remains of some fallen nicker and bury them in the slimy womb-earth. After a time this
spews forth some vital regeneration of those parts, another full-fledged monster to terrorize the
homes of men." He looked about shrewdly.
Not one person moved. Swill had intrigued them all.
"But here is the rub, you see. The movements of the races of men and tribes of theroid, all
those risings and fallings, have left many threwdishly fecund places untended by their monsterlords, deserted but still oozing with foul potential. Yet unattended and unchecked by a curinine's
will, these most threwdish of places we seldom if ever dare to navigate can still produce life,
making strange beasties of whatever creatures might fetch up and die there. This abominable
process we learned few call abinition, and this, lords, ladies, gentlemen" — Swill raised a salient
finger into the air — "this is how Ingébiargë was made: a woman, some woman, nobody knows
who, three thousand years ago perhaps, dies in one of these gravid places and falls, her remains
swallowed by the hungry ooze. Sometime later out comes — what?" The surgeon shrugged and
stared at his audience expectantly.
Expressions were blank, except Fransitart and Craumpalin: both were gray-faced, as illlooking as Rossamünd felt. Despairing, Rossamünd looked to Europe. The fulgar was not paying
him any mind, her astute, raptorial gaze fixed on the surgeon.
"Is it human? Is it monster? This thing sprung from the muds. We do not know for certain,"
Swill pressed on, unaware of this calculating regard. "What we do know is that what is ‘born’ —
for the need of a better term — is reformed from the debris of human matter, birthed from the

threwd, a wicked repeat of some lost and departed person. This we call a manikin, and whatever
it might be, this reconstituted creature is certainly not human. I commend to you that if it is not
human, then rationally it must be a monster, and even if it is not, a manikin is not something we
want walking free among us." He paused and looked about the room with evident academic
pleasure. "In the case we have before us today, things, I fear, go much deeper than simple
sedonition. Rather, events must have proceeded upon similar particulars as I have just related. In
some blightedly threwdish dell in the hinterlands of Hergoatenbosch, some poor lost fellow dies
and falls. His remains are sucked up by the mud and slowly, by action of heat and threwd, maybe
over centuries, they are remade, an abomination simulacrum birthed from the loam; another
manikin. And what becomes of it? This manikin is somehow found and taken to a wastrel-house
in the city to be raised as an everyman. Yet it is, in fact, not one of us at all."
There was a baffled pause, people's faces intent or dumbly wondering.
"Now, ladies and gentlemen, we all know the name Rossamünd — a sweet and apt name for
some lovely, cherished girl... and, as it happens, the unfortunate and completely inapt name of
this young lighter here" — Swill looked about keenly — "but who of you has heard of a
rossamünderling?"
Vacant faces met him.
"None of you?" The surgeon's satisfaction was evident. "I am not surprised; such a word has
never appeared on any of the usual taxonomist's lists. I, with all my reading, had not encountered
such a word — until recently, that is, a happy accident of my persistent study. How does that
interest us? Just so: Ingébiargë is a rossamünderling. All manikins are. You see, after much
esoteric study I discovered in the most obscure of texts a most fascinating word:
Rossamünderling — an ünterman in the appearance of an everyman. Rossamünd." The man now
pivoted on his heel, spitting in his passion, and pointed ferociously at Rossamünd. "For that is
my point! That you — YOU, young Rossamünd whatever-you-are — you are that mud-born
abomination! You are a manikin! You are a rossamünderling! A thrice-blighted wretchling in
human guise!"
There was a great shout of disbelief, of horror, from almost every throat in the room.
Threnody jerked away from him, staring at him in dismay.
Rossamünd could scarcely breathe. He did not know whether to laugh or cry or shout down
the surgeon's foolishness. Mastering himself, he stood and looked to his old masters, and
something in their eyes struck him more than any preposterous accusation of some strutting
massacar. For the words of Grotius Swill, secret maker of gudgeons and clandestine traitor to the
Empire, might possibly be true.
Europe's gaze was narrow and inscrutable as she peered at Rossamünd.
What does she think?
Laudibus Pile sneered, stroking his chin in wicked satisfaction.
The Master-of-Clerks actually managed to look stunned, and the Imperial Secretary with him.
"Yet if you need proofs of my logic, I simply quote this fine young peeress," Swill pursued,
"the daughter of the august of our very own faithfully serving calendars."
The Lady Vey sat erect, her face hard and supercilious with hidden distaste, not giving a hint
whose side she was for. She turned this brittle gaze to her daughter, and Threnody dropped her
head, either unwilling or unable to look at Rossamünd.
"This fine girl speaks of his great destroying strength," Swill continued, "a bizarre aberration
that immediately piqued my curiosity. Then she explains of his habit of always hiding his smell
behind a nullodor. Why would one perpetually wear a nullodor, I asked myself, when one spends
one's life safe in the world of men? And the answer came: unless you were trying to hide that
you were not a man at all!" The surgeon said this last with a very pointed look at Rossamünd.
"And of course you did not want to be marked with the blood of your own kind," he cried, "for
not only would the idea be repugnant, you know that on your flesh a dolatramentis cannot show,
for one monster's blood will surely not make a mark on another! "

The young lighter's thoughts reeled, and he blinked in dismay at the surgeon's accusations.
"More so," Swill pursued, "if what the august's daughter says is true, then this one's masters
have conspired with it to hide its nature — a foul and deplorable act of outramour as has ever
been documented!"
Fransitart and Craumpalin looked hard at the surgeon and refused to be cowed.
The Master-of-Clerks stared squarely at Rossamünd, a conquering glimmer in the depths of
the man's studied gaze. "What do you have to say for this, Lampsman 3rd Class?"
Rossamünd felt the blood leave his face and sweat prickle on his brow and neck. He could
not let these puzzle-headed fallacies pass unchallenged. But what could he say to such outlandish
poppycockery?
"Tell me, surgeon," Sicus asked firmly, "how by the remotest here and vere do you propose to
substantiate such a bizarre accusation? This young lighter as a sedorner is a charge I am prepared
to hear out, but a monster who looks like a person! This is a very long line you plumb, sir. How
do you intend to substantiate this obscure conjecturing?"
Swill balked, momentarily stumped, but rallied, a solution clearly blossoming in his thoughts.
"If you would but indulge me just a little further, we could but take a little of this — this one's
blood; someone could be marked, and in a fortnight or so the proof would be there. Only a
monster's blood will make a mark on a person if pricked into the skin."
Threnody gasped.
Sicus and Whympre and his staff were thunderstruck, and the Lady Vey too.
"I'll not let ye cut ‘im!" Fransitart cried, half standing but held back by Craumpalin.
Europe still did not move or comment, and the black-eyed wit kept his heavy-lidded scrutiny
ever fixed on her.
To the universal surprise of the room, it was Rossamünd who spoke in Swill's support. "Take
my blood," he said firmly, not quite believing what was coming out of his own mouth. Yet he
was resolute. "How else can I show that this... that Mister Swill is wrong?"
"How else indeed? Bravely said, young fellow!" Swill enthused. "And to make it a truly
impartial test, it would be best for one member each of the interested parties to be marked. In that
way none can accuse the other of fabricating a result."
"This is most irregular, surgeon," Secretary Sicus cautioned.
"A serious and far-fetched charge has been laid at this young lighter, sirs," the Lady Vey
interrupted. "I say let a little blood be taken from him and the poor boy's innocence and heritage
be established."
"As you wish it, m'lady." Sicus nodded and made a dignified bow.
This sealed it.
Swill chose himself to represent the Empire and the lighters. Fransitart quickly offered
himself on Rossamünd's behalf.
A small dish, a small bottle, a guillion and an orbis were called for.
Grimacing, Rossamünd held out a finger, profoundly aware of the trust he was suddenly
placing in a man he considered the blackest of all black habilists.
From the small bottle, Swill dabbed the young lighter's fingertip with a thin, straw-yellow
fluid, then dipped the guillion-tip in the same.
"This is libermane," he explained to the room. "To make the sanguine humours flow easy."
The surgeon deftly punctured Rossamünd's fingertip with the guillion and more blood than
Rossamünd expected began to drip out.
Feeling stupidly giddy, the young prentice let many drops of his blood splicker into the dish
to from a little puddlet there.
"That will be sufficient," Swill said when a coin-sized puddle of it had collected in the dish.
With professional regard, he automatically passed Rossamünd a pledget to stanch the tiny wound.
"Hark ye, clever-cogs! I shall go first," Fransitart insisted, looking very much as if he wanted
to pound the surgeon to stuff. With a look of deep revulsion he removed his wide-collared day-

coat and, rolling up the sleeve of his shirt, presented the inside of his wrist. "Right there'll do
fine, ye bookish blackguard," he growled malignantly at Swill.
The surgeon swallowed nervously. "As you wish, Jack tar," he answered and, taking up the
orbis, dipped the guillion in Rossamünd's blood and began to tap away on the old dormitory
master's blotched skin. Gripping the pledget to his finger, Rossamünd could not watch, and he
looked up at the great antlers of the Herdebog Trought splayed above them. Even in these strange
circumstances he still felt revulsion at the tap-tap-tapping of orbis on needle.
Swill seemed to have barely made a start when Europe stirred. She stood and stepped directly
to Rossamünd.
The black-eyed wit straightened, looking ready to fight.
Distracted by Europe's action, the surgeon hesitated then stopped his tapping.
Standing by the young lighter's side, Europe looked with serene confidence at the powerful
men gathered before her. "This has all been greatly diverting," she said with a tone of mild
amusement, "but I must now say, gentlemen and strigs, that it is time Rossamünd and I were
going. His tenure with the lighters has, I think it is safe to say, come to an end." She touched him
lightly on the shoulder. "Come along, Rossamünd."
"Stay where you are, Lampsman!" The Master-of-Clerks stood in turn.
Rossamünd hesitated out of martial habit.
"You cannot take him, madam," Whympre contradicted disdainfully. "This is a court-martial
of our Most Just Emperor, trying one of the Emperor's own servants, and we," he said, turning a
haughty glance to the Imperial Secretary sitting officiously by, "we shall deal with him according
to our own right rule."
"Don't come at me with that sneer in your nostrils, sir!" Europe warned. "You may have your
dour Haacobin friend there" — she nodded to the Imperial Secretary — "but he is still just a clerk
— whomever he might know, and you and he are together beneath me by more degrees than you
have fingers or toes collected."
The Imperial Secretary began to rise, declaiming loudly, "You flagitious shrew! How dare
you interrupt an Imperial proceeding while—"
"You, Master Secretary, tread dangerous turfs!" Europe's eyes went wide in indignation.
"You are addressing Europa, Duchess-in-waiting of Naimes, Peer of the Haacobin Empire,
Marchess of Vewe, shareward of the Soutland states, descendant of Euodice — speardame of the
immortal Idaho, and of Eutychë her granddaughter — spurn to Dido, and the Branden Rose, terror
to man and nicker alike, and I will dare, sir, and I do !"
The Imperial Secretary opened his mouth to remonstrate, but Europe spoke him down. "If
that will not silence you, impudent wretch, then I say simply QGU and now the matter is done!"
QGU? Rossamünd stared. Quo gratia! Europe was using her ancient right as a peer to
overrule any court. She was using it for him...
The Lady Vey glowered at the fulgar scornfully.
The black-eyed wit took a step forward, but was stopped by a brusque wave of Secretary
Sicus' hand.
"Good day to you, Master Secretary," she concluded. "You are at perfect liberty to go tell of
my wielding of this venerable privilege to your cunning masters and all your fellow glaucologs up
in Clementine, babbling away and filling the world with words; it will do you little good. For if it
is a trading of status and influence you seek, I come ready prepared."
To this not even the Imperial Secretary had a fit or contrary answer.
"Come, Rossamünd, we go." The fulgar took him by the hand.
Rossamünd glanced quickly at the thunderstruck Board and fumbled the chair out from the
table, tripping on one of the legs in his haste. Without a word needing to be said, Fransitart took a
pledget form the table, rolled down his sleeve, put his day-coat back on, and he and Craumpalin
followed after. The rest of the room were too stunned to act. Heading not too briskly down the

passages of the manse — far be it for Europe to hurry — Craumpalin handed Fransitart a
handkerchief to wrap the puncting-wound upon his wrist.
"We can't thank ye enough, my lady!" the old dormitory master gruffed.
"Don't wax too grateful, old salt," Europe returned tartly, more intent on exit than gratitude.
"I had not intended on rescuing the boy's entire staff, but you may come if you wish!"
"We wish it, madam," Fransitart said quickly. "We'll not leave our boy to the world's scarce
mercies. Carry on — we shall get Rossamünd's dunnage," the ex-dormitory master insisted. "We
shall be returnin' presently!" Before any argument could be made he hurried off, no sign of any
limp, Craumpalin close behind, both disappearing up the stairs to their temporary quarters.
Rossamünd hesitate with his old masters' departure, feeling a strange conflict. The fulgar
detained him with a touch to his sleeve. "Stay, little man. You are safest with me!"
They were out of the manse and walking the gravel drive to the coach yard when the Masterof-Clerks and the rest of the Board finally followed, gathering on the steps before the manse.
Imperial Secretary Scrupulus Sicus gave a great cry, hollering for the day-watch to "descend and
prevent these blighted rascals from escaping!"
Some haubardiers from the wall responded and hurried down from the battlements to the
Mead to cautiously bar the way. They were clearly uneasy to be confronting a lahzar. Europe
stopped before them and turned to face her pursuers.
The black-eyed wit stepped forward, grim satisfaction clear.
"Cease where you are, Madam Fulgar," The Master-of-Clerks decried boldly. "Whatever the
surgeon's wild speculations, there is still the question of this lad's alleged sedonition to be
answered for!"
"Tilly-fally, sir!" Europe returned with a sneer. "Bestir me not with your lip-laboring. If
talking with a nicker makes one a sedorner, then I would be guilty almost every other day! Stand
your men aside! Do not force me to use more physical arguments!"
The black-eyed wit hesitated.
Laudibus Pile snarled and glared.
Podious Whympre puffed himself up, spluttered and even cursed, but did not continue his
intervention.
The day-watch haubardiers happily stepped aside even before the order to do so was on the
clerk-master's lips.
Among them Rossamünd could see Swill a the clerk-master's back, wrapping his own arm
with a bandage, staring with inordinate, slow-blinking fascination at him.
Fransitart and Craumpalin returned bearing all their baggage. Somehow Doctor Crispus was
with them, bearing some part of the load.
"Clear the way, thank you!" the doctor demanded, pushing through to the young lighter and
the fulgar.
With some jostling and snarls, Fransitart, Craumpalin and the doctor were allowed to pass and
Europe led them and Rossamünd away from the flabbergasted crowd. A lentum rolled up for
them — Europe own hired carriage.
The Lady Vey and her calendars now emerged from the manse and stepped about Whympre's
party and out onto the gravel drive. With profound calm Europe and the Lady Vey regarded each
other as they passed. Threnody stood alongside her mother, safe among her calendine sisters.
She stared at Rossamünd with inscrutable intensity, the tracks of tears on her cheeks.
This difficult, abrasive witting girl had stayed true through it all, and Rossamünd wanted to
thank her, to embrace her. Yet dazed, and baffled by the sudden turn of his fortunes, he remained
close by Europe.
"Greetings, Branden Rose," said the august.
"And to you, Syntychë," Europe returned icily.
There seemed a self-satisfied gleam in the Lady Vey's steady gaze. "We had heard you lost
that foul fellow Licurius in a theroscade. How sad you must have been."

Europe's top lip twitched. Her iciness became a grim freeze. "Yes, I was," she said, ever so
quietly — and that was all. She let herself be handed on to their transport by the side-armsman.
Desperate to leave this miserable fortress, Rossamünd mounted the carriage step. "Good-bye,
Rossamünd," he heard Threnody call as she was borne away to the coach yard. He was about to
cry a farewell of his own when Doctor Crispus suddenly stepped before him, filling his view.
"Fare-you-well, young Bookchild." The good physician extended his hand for a manly shake.
"It has been a pleasure to have one of your quality serve here. May you and your masters," he
said, looking about the cabin, "find kinder stops along your road."
Rossamünd swatted away tears. "Good-bye, Doctor Crispus! Good-bye!"
"Come with us, good doctor," Europe offered, standing on the top step as Fransitart and
Craumpalin hastily loaded their goods. "Though I do not know you, the boy trusts you and that
says much for me. A man of physics standing ready by is always an asset."
The physician nodded a bow. "I thank you, madam — your offer has its merits. But I would
remain, for there are others here who need my care yet."
Rossamünd knew Crispus was speaking of Numps. Poor, poor Numps hiding somewhere
below them in the dank ancient cellars and pipes. Rossamünd was suddenly sharply aware he
would probably never see the glimner again.
"I know you will keep care of him, Doctor," he said low and fast. "Tell him good-bye from
me if you see him."
Luggage stowed, Fransitart and Craumpalin clambered aboard with admirable activity in such
aged fellows.
"Leave now." Crispus slammed the door of the coach shut. "Each moment make tensions
thicker." He called to the driver. "Drive hard, sir, and safe! Get these good people to better
places!"
A crack of whip and shout of starting and the carriage shot forward. Rossamünd held his
breath, not quite believing he was actually winning free of this place. He caught one last
confusing sight of Threnody staring after the departing carriage before they were through those
mighty bronze gates. Only when the lentum clattered off the Serid Approach and onto the
Gainway did Rossamünd manage to breathe evenly again. As Craumpalin more properly
bandaged Fransitart's puncted arm, Rossamünd looked to his old master. Fransitart turned his
gaze to him. Deep conflicts showed there, old sorrows and new, a great agonized confusion. It
was the nearest Rossamünd had seen his old dormitory master come to tears, and it terrified him
more than any anger could.
"Master Fransitart?" Rossamünd reached out with his hand. Don't cry... he wanted to say, but
did not know how. A thousand thoughts collided. Who am I? Is what Swill says true? And as
he looked again at his dormitory master, a small frightened voice, right down in his most inward
place... Do you still love me?
"Don't ye fret, lad," the old salt said with a determined smile, taking Rossamünd's hand, "we'll
fathom ye out of all this." The dormitory master looked to Europe.
The fulgar sat straight and proud, staring out of the opposite window, taking small notice of
the man.
"Listen to thy ol’ Master Frans," Craumpalin encouraged as he finished his mending. "He and
I ‘ave been in worse dilemmas. We'll see thee right."
Yet as Rossamünd smiled to reassure the old dispensurist it was only face-deep. The doubts
persisted. Am I truly some kind of half-done monster? Am I a manikin? A rossamünderling?
It's like my stupid name... And a worse thought: Have Fransitart and Craumpalin been lying to
me all these years? His smile failed altogether. WHO AM I? his soul cried. In a small voice he
dared to ask, "Master Fransitart, who am I?"
The confusion in the old vinegaroon's eyes deepened. His wrinkled lips pressed and squeezed
together as, for the first time Rossamünd had ever known, Fransitart was struck speechless.

In the aching muteness Europe turned and looked at Rossamünd with a mild expression.
"Why, little man," she said, "you're my factotum."
...And with the sun just reaching its meridian, the carriage clattered down the Gainway,
bearing him, his one-time foundlingery masters and the mercurial fulgar to Silvernook, then
perhaps to High Vesting and unguessable ends.

FINIS DUOLIBRIS
(END BOOK TWO)

EXPLICARIUM
BEING A GLOSSARY OF TERMS
& EXPLANATIONS INCLUDING
APPENDICES

GXH
NOTES ON THE EXPLICARIUM
A word set in italics indicates that you will find an explanation of that word also in the
Explicarium; the only exceptions to this are the names of rams and other vessels, and the titles of
books, where it is simply a convention to put these names in italics.

See (entry in) Book One" refers the reader to the Explicarium in Foundling, Monster Blood
Tattoo, Book One, by D.M. Cornish.

PRONUNCIATION
ä is said as the “ar” sound in “ask” or “car”
æ is said as the “ay” sound in “hay” or “eight”
ë is said as the “ee” sound in “scream” or “beep”
é is said as the “eh” sound in “shed” or “everyone”
ö is said as the “er” sound in “learn” or “burn”
ü is said as the “oo” sound in “wood” or “should”
~ at the end of pronouns is said as the “een” sound in “bean” or “seen”; the exception to this is
“Clementine,” which is said as the “eyn” sound in “fine” or “mine.”
Words ending in e, such as “Verline” or “Grintwoode”: the e is not sounded.
SOURCES
In researching this document the scholars are indebted to many sources. Of them all the
following proved the most consistently sourced:
The Pseudopædia
Master Matthius’ Wandering Almanac: A Wordialogue of Matter, Generalism & Habilistics
The Incomplete Book of Bogles
Weltchronic
The Book of Skolds
& extracts from the Vadè Chemica

A
abinition spontaneous generation of life from muds and clays warmed by the sun in powerfully threwdish places.
Such soils are called fecund or abinitive muds, or in the uncommon vernacular, life-loams. Some more extreme
theories hold that these life-loams, these dipherbiosës (literally “seats of life”) can exist even in the heart of an urban
park or rural lumber plantation, that where plants flourish (even domesticated varieties) threwd can concentrate in
boggy dells and the ground become fecund. When known beyond the esoteric provinces of the teratological habilists
this concept is generally rejected as being too terrible to contemplate.

Accord of Menschen, the ~ what we would think of as an “international” agreement upon the rules of conduct
in warfare, standardizing procedures of victory, surrender, the treatment of the loser and of neutrals; a ratification of a
much older document known as the Usages of War, a set of dogma governing behavior to foes, prisoners,
noncombatants, and the wounded and infirm during war. Though it was primarily drawn up in reference to land
warfare, naval officers will also cite it, thought they have their own accord — the Articles of Conduct; however, this
is not as comprehensive in its statutes.

“ad captandum vulgus” a Tutin political term literally meaning “toward courting the crowd” but used more in
the sense of doing things to please the people, to inspire confidence.

alembant(s) broadly speaking, scripts that alter the biology of a person, such as the washes that make a leer's eyes.
Specifically, the term can be used to refer to the potives taken by lahzars to keep their surgically introduced organs
from vaoriating (spasming). The best known of these is Cathar's Treacle. See lahzar in Book One.

almonder assistant to a dispensurist or a skold, who does much of the fetching and carrying and reordering and
other less glamorous work.

alternates, the ~ catch-all name for the secondary or subcapitals of the Haacobin Empire, being the Considine and
the Serenine in the Soutlands, and Campaline on the Verid Litus.

amanuensis clerk who takes minutes, makes duplicates and triplicates of documents and writes notes on the
details of official conversations.

Approach, the ~ steep “driveway” that leads up to Winstermill from the Harrowmath. It is actually split in two,
one way continuing east down to the Pettiwiggin and the other curving south to join the Gainway.

Arabis, Arimis son of a poor peltryman, Paddlin Arabis from Fayelillian way, who died of exposure on a
desperate winter's foray along with his crew of trappers. Raised by his mother in deep squalor, Arabis was first
prenticed to another peltryman; when things turned foul he escaped, living by his wits and making his gradual and
circuitous way to the capital. There he chanced upon a recruitment drive for the lamplighters of Winstermill, and
took the Emperor's Billion there and then.

ash-dabbling(s) working with organs and other parts of corpses. The “hobby” of massacars and other black
habilists, taking this name from “ash” as a synonym for the remains of a person.

Ashenstall last cothouse east before the Wormway descends out of the highlands of the Placidine down onto the
Frugelle and the start of the “ignoble end of the road,” taking its name from the gray land about it, and perhaps from
the local stone of which it is mostly built.

ashmonger(s) part of the chain of supply in the dark trades. When stocks of body parts are low, the worst of these
will stoop to abduction and murder to get he required items. If such items need to be of a certain “ripeness” to be
useful, they weill achieve this artificially, with chemistry. Stolen bodies are sometimes called anthropelf. See entry
in Book One.

aspis as stated, this is a venificant, a highly toxic contact poison that allows the often harmless blows of a person
against a monster to have rapid and deadly effect. The only problem with such potives is that they are deadly to
people too, one touch being enough to cause some great discomfort in the very least. Aspis is one of the more
preferred venificants because it is a little slower to act, meaning that accidental touch will not do much harm,
although it is deadly once a good dose of it has entered a body's system.

Assimus surly, sandy-haired, pinch-faced lampsman 1st class serving at Winstermill. In semiretirement owing to
the early onset of arthritis, this lighter has been granted the easiest stretch of the Wormway on which to work and see
out his days. Along with his old mate Bellicos, he has seen service on most of the inner stretches of the highroad,
even enduring a spell at the “ignoble end of the road.”

astrapecrith the correct technical term for a fulgar. The equivalent for a wit is neuroticrith.
Atopian Dido reference to the time when Dido, the great ancient queen and founder of the Empire, was without a
home, wandering the region once known as Opera and the Witherlends, driven to flight through the attempt on her
life by jealous ministers wanting power for themselves. For several years she wandered from kingdom to kingdom,
staying where she might, till the monarch of Patris took her in and rallied in support of her as the last surviving shoot
of Idaho's line.

Attic language of the ancient people of the same name, a mighty race of great learning and sophistication, the direct
inheritor of Phlegm's cultural, technological and sociopolitical legacy. Much of what they knew is now lost, the
remnants still considered the acme of wisdom and habilistics. Idaho is considered their greatest ruler, and Dido, her
great-granddaughter, second only to her. The language itself is based on the real Attic (otherwise known as classical
Greek), and with this comes the author's usual apology for any offense his current usages might incur.

Aubergene Lampsman 1st class billeted at Wormstool and a native of Burgundis, he is renowned for his steady aim
even in the most trying situations. Though little is said of it now, early last decade he earned deep respect and not a
few cruorpunxis when defending a search party in the Ichormeer. These foiled rescuers had been attempting to find
the lost family of the Warden-General of Haltmire, who disappeared in the terrible swamp. Few traces found could
be followed, and those that could led only to disaster as the swamp swallowed men whole and its denizens preyed on
them like cats in a mouse plague. As part of a rear guard, Aubergene's deadly shots bought space for the retreating
party, who found only one child — the middle daughter — to take back to her agonized father. For his deeds the
young lighter was awarded the Carpa Virtus (the Hand of Valor), the highest honor available to a mere lighter.

aufheitermen said “owf’high’ter’men”; the Gott word for lamplighters, meaning literally “the gloom lighteners”
or “those who bring lightness to the gloom.”

august ruler of a single calendar clave; typically a woman of some social stature, perhaps a peer, or noble, with a
social conscience. To have any chance of affecting their surrounds, calendars need money and political clout, and
those with high standing socially possess these attributes natively. A clave that does not have ranking gentry or
nobility at its head and core, or at least as a sponsor, will most certainly be marginalized. Augusts are seconded by
there laudes, who are their mouthpieces and their long reach. With a well-organized and talented clave with her, an
august can be a daunting and influential figure in Imperial politics and society. Within her own clave the august is
often referred to as the senior-sister.

aurang in the Half-Continent's version of a card deck the aurang is the fourth station (card value) in the house of
brutes (animals), below the daw (3) and above the crocidole (5). An aurang is what we would call an orangutan,
being found on the smaller islands of the northern Sinus Tintinabuline and found in the Half-Continent usually only
in books, though wide-faring vinegaroons may well have seen one or two. The aurang lends its name to one of the
winning hands in the card game pirouette, "Kindly Ladies Watch the Happy Aurangs Again.

auto-savant a person who, by the exercise of extremely sensitive and attuned intuition, is supposed to be able to
tell a person's thoughts and needs. Most of these are rejected as humorless fakers and fabulists by those of the more
serious habilistic turn of mind.

auxiliary, auxiliaries in this circumstance the people in support of Winstermill and her lamplighters, including
the house guards of musketeers, haubardiers and troubardiers; leers and lurksmen and other “creepers”; skolds and
other thaumateers; and the artillerists tending the great-guns on the walls.

ax-carabine also called axe-carbine or fusiscuris, a combinade made of a fusil-like firelock with an ax-blade
attached to the muzzle.

B
bane teratologist who is both wit and skold, either beginning as a skold then choosing the neuroticrith's path to
increase his or her power, or beginning as a wit and becoming adept at skolding. This second path is not uncommon:
a wit has to take many more concoctions than a fulgar to keep healthy — and many of these are more complex to
make than Cathar's Treacle. Wits may well opt to make these themselves rather than be tied to other suppliers, which
is said by some to be a risky business as far as consistency of quality and efficacy are concerned. In the way of
learning their own scripts, wits may well discover that it is within their abilities to make other potives, and branch out
into scolding. A bane is therefore considered more versatile and greater in power that a plain wit.

bastion-house strongly fortified house or other such dwelling reinforced to withstand the rigors of conflict.
Cothouses are often a form of bastion-house.

Baton Imperial of Fayelillian, the 8th Earl of the ~ the Lamplighter-Marshal's proper title, the hereditary
rank granted to his Fayelillian family by Menagës Scepticus Haacobin I, the usurper of the Sceptics and the original
Emperor of the current dynasty. Even so the Lamplighter-Marshal will not allow others to address him by any other
title than ‘sir,’ as befits his military rank.

bee's buzz, the buzz gossip and rumor, so called for the buzzing sound of folks engaged in hushed mutterings
about another.

Beggar Sea the body of water off the Stander Lates and the southern coasts of Hagenland, the Stafkarlsstig or
“wandering beggar” in Brandenard. In the Half-Continent it is known as the Pontus Mendicus.

Bellicos one of the three semiretired lampsmen who look after the prentices as they practice at lighting along the
Pettiwiggin. A little younger than his two compatriots, Bellicos is probably the surliest of the three, though he is
generally forgiven this for the feats of valor he performed during his full service out Ashenstall way.

bellpomash mild restorative which, though drunk, is said to help the clotting and healing of wounds by fortifying
the body's functions from within.

belugig(s) also belongs; large monsters, especially ettins or even the great beasts of the mares.
Benedict, Under-Sergeant-of-Prentices ~ red-haired assistant to Lamplighter-Sergeant Grindrod. Benedict's
carrot-colored hair is remarkable in northern Soutlands, showing his Wretcherman heritage. He and his sweet little
wife, Daisy, live down in the Nuptarium in the Target Row, on Target Street.

benthamyn constituent of Craumpalin's Exstinker; a distillation of oils found only in the rock of certain regions of
the Sinus Tintinabuline, Wretch and the Gottskylds, with the best quality part coming from the Heilgolands.

Berthezene artist sometimes going by the name of Berthezar, once a native of Turkeman, come to the Sundergird
in flight from the husband of a mistress, and shopping his considerable skills as an imagineer (an illustrator) to any
buyer, including pamphlet makers both reputable and disreputable. His talent is lauded by some as the most
remarkable of the age, rivaling even the legendary Gouche, though that fellow's admirers disagree.

besomer(s) broom-makers.
Biargë the Beautiful (said "bee-arr-gee" — with a strong g as in “get”); common, easier to pronounce form of
Ingébiargë (said “Ing’ga’bee’arr’gee”), the name of the cannibalistic monster-woman of Hagenland's southern shores,
also known as Biargë the Salt-skold or, in Gott folklore, as Beogerthë the Cruel. Of the few manikins known to
history, Biargë is perhaps the best documented, though few ordinary folk know her origin — or even know of her.
Her origin is found in times long gone, in the lands of the Skylds, during a period of particular and morbid conflict
there between human and monster known as the Volkammerung — a time of decay after the Heldinsage when heroes
prevailed and civilization flourished. A faithful servant and yrrphethäl (“ earr’feh’tharl,” equivalent to a rhubezhal —
see skold in Book One) to Ulfe Pytr
(said “Ull’fer Pie’ter” — the great Hagen king who drove the Skylds from their rightful land), Biargë was hailed for
her cold beauty and treacherous use of her great skill to aid the Hagenards against her own people. As time passed,
and well after the Skylds had fled west across the Gramlendenmeer (“The Sea of Heavy Sorrows”) Biargë became
noted most of all for the longevity of her beauty, and it was soon rumored that she had brewed a potion of powerful
virtue to prolong life and youth. Puzzled as to her own juvenescence, Biargë encouraged this rumor, yet it doubled
back on her: Uthoedë (said “yoo’tho’dee”), Ulfe Pytr's wife, pressed her husband mercilessly to insist that their
court's beauteous concocter make this tender brew for the queen as well. Many times he cajoled, remonstrated with
and railed against Ingébiargë, and each time he was refused, first with kind excuses then with outright obduracy. On
each occasion he had to return to a furious wife and a night spent banished from the conjugal bed. Goaded by her
imperturbable obstinacy, Uthoedë went herself to Biargë's test, taking with her a number of mighty men of the
Volkammerung — Skarphethinn (said “Skar’feh’thin”) and Grettir preeminent among them. They took Biargë into
custody, ransacked her home, turned up no vital potive and imprisoned the rhubezhal in the darkest depths of
Steindurom, the regal stronghold. There, under pain of torture, Biargë confessed that there was no potion of
youthfulness, that she did not know why she was still young after so long. Väkr, the royal signifier (“watcher of
stars”) tested her for threwd. On finding its subtle but definite presence, he renamed Biargë the Tvymadthrmaen —
the twice-false maid — and she was declared a samligr (something akin to a sedorner). Uthoedë screamed for her
doom and Ulfe Pytr sentenced Biargë to be executed at next moon's dark. Yet not all were against her. One Freyr,
brother and equal of Grettir and nephew to Ulfe Pytr, was besotted with the long-lived beauty, and when time came
for her burning, contrived to set her free. In their flight Väkr was slain by the chemistry of the damned maiden and
many houseguards with him. The two lovers fled to the Illr and lost themselves in that haunted land; not even
Skarphethinn, Biarkemil, Syfyrd, Gudbrand or the wounded and anguished Grettir nor any other of the men of
renown would follow after. So Biargë and One Freyr wandered in the wilds, aided by strange and inscrutable folk —
the haustayr or hausti, the autumn-folk that men were forbidden to converse with — till they made their home across
the Leith Fol, on the Stendrlaeti (see the Stander Lates), the shores of the Linen Finné. Here Biargë suffered the deep
grief of watching her young love One Freyr age, and decrepitude approach, while she stayed forever young. In
bitterness and grief her thoughts blackened, and she cursed the cosmos and plotted useless revenge — for all but
Biarkamil, the warrior-poet, had withered and died. She searched and brewed and scoured the lands, trying to find
the secret of the vital brew she had once been so mistakenly condemned for making. She terrorized communities and
stole their parts and potives, slew young men out of spite or abducted them to test and refine her concoctions. Many
of these poor subjects did gain a kind of prolonged life, but each one was twisted and broken by the experiments he
endured. No matter what the increasingly crazed Biargë tried, she failed utterly to find the perfect elixir to keep her
lover and rescuer whole and by her side for always. The common end for Freyr is that he went the way of all people,
yet awed stories remain that, among the walking, shuffling horrors that make the Stnedrlaeti an impossibly dangerous
place, is the moldering mindless hanuman of One Freyr, aching with longing he no longer understands. As for
Biargë, she is said to live still, her skin gone gray with time and her eyes red and yellow from centuries of skolding
— utterly mad and insatiably ravenous, seeking to devour all men she can find, wanting in twisted love to take them
unto herself, where they might continue on and not wither with age. She is said to have devised many ways to lure
vessels and their crews onto the risky shores of the Stander Lates, whereby she desires to consume each one. The
best source of information on Biargë can be found in that ancient book of horrors, the Derereader.

billet where pediteers, lamplighters or other military personnel sleep and live when not on duty.
Billeting Day day when prentice-lighters are granted status as full lampsmen, having completed their training. In
a solemn ceremony, prentices reswear their vow of service to the Emperor and are assigned to a cothouse where they
will serve out what days are left to tem lighting and dousing the lanterns on the appropriate stretches of road.

biologue(s) any device or machine that uses actual living organs to provide its functions. See sthenicon in Book
One.

Bitterbolt cothouse on the Wormway situated just beyond the eastern bank of the Bittermere.
bitterbright powerful and rare potive, a delicate fulminant that, by the cunning artifice of its chemistry, produces
light to hurt the gaze of any who look at it. Unless it is actively replenished, bitterbright burns for a limited duration,
its effect lessening as it burns low. Therefore you must be constantly working to keep it “burning” if you want its
painful glow to remain.

Bittermere, the ~ small river running from high in the Owlgrave that swells greatly in size before joining the
Migh on the northern edge of Needle Greening. Said to be threwdish, it derives its name from the sharp, foul taste of
its tealike waters, sweetened only slightly by the joining of its flow with the swift-flowing Mirthlbrook.

black habilist(s) term most commonly used to refer to massacars or transmogrifiers; those considered to be
dabbling in the darker sides of learning; the great patrons of the dark trades, which would not exist without them. See
habilists in Book One.

blaste any fulminating potive or script that erupts or explodes, loomblaze being an excellent example.
Bleakhall cothouse at Bleak Lynche, upon which its inhabitants are greatly dependent for safety and the dispensing
of justice. It is one of the more irregular duties of the house-major to preside over the smaller civil disputes. Built
before the town, as a position of retreat for those dwelling at Haltmire, Bleakhall is one of the larger cothouses on the
way and is meant to be billet to an overstrength of lamplighters and their auxiliaries.

Bleak Lynche last civil settlement in the eastern edges of the Idlewild, gaining its name from its remoteness and
the poor prospects of the land about it, and from the bridges spanning between the high towerlike houses built there
— otherwise called “linches.” Founded by the state of Doggenbrass, the settlement's best source of corporate income
is tending to the needs of the lamplighters and postmen posted there, and as a trading post and “stopover” for those
few travelers coming up on the Wettin Lowroad from Burgundis and Hurdling Migh. This is still thin pickings, and
the lords of Doggenbrass have found themselves paying frequently to prop up the ailing colony, many of whose
citizens have moved to the more prosperous mining settlements in the region, the Louthe or Pot. One can find
pathsmen here: private wayfarers who contract out their energies as guides and guards to those foolish few who wish
to travel the Wormway into and through the Ichormeer, or take the Wettin Lowroad down to Hurdling Migh and
beyond.

blighted of or pertaining to monsters or threwd, especially the worst kinds of threwd. Used as an emphatic curse
— with “twice” or “thrice” or some other preceding qualification for extra emphasis — to declare a person or thing
bad or unworthy or worthless.

bloom shortened form of “glimbloom,” also known as frons lumen or collucia, and sometimes referred to as stuff
(though this is a catch-all term); the aquatic, weedlike plant possessed — in certain circumstances — of
bioluminescence used to provide the source of illumination for bright-limns and the great-lamps of the highroads and
cities. It is a wonderful, regenerating source of light, but there are those who hold that having it, and particularly
growing it, is an enticement to monsters, who are said to like the taste of it. Others disagree, particularly lampsmen
out on the roads working with bloom each day, who argue that the monsters tend to find them much more toothsome.
Some seltzermen, on the other hand, might complain of a disproportionate incidence of theroscades when they are out
replacing the worn-out bloom of a great-lamp.

blunderer offensive term for a non-military person, used by pediteers and their like in the same way a vinegaroon
might call a landsman a lubber. Very rude when said to another soldier.

boltarde a combinade or weapon made of a combination of two or more other tools of violence. Essentially a
boltarde is the bringing together of a helmbarde (what we would call a halberd) with two wheel lock pistols formed
as part of the shaft, one short barrel on either side of the ax-and-spike-head. The wheel locks are fired by means of

triggers farther down, just above the rondel that protects that hand. Shallow grooves run down the middle of the
blade to allow the ball to fly unhindered. An invention of the Sebastians, it is unwieldy by highly effective in the
right circumstances, although boltardes have not gained much popularity in the Haacobin Empire.

book(s) in the Half-Continent there is a whole library of catalogs and matters on monsters, habilistics, necrology
and more; among the more necessary (other than the Vadé Chemica — see Book One — and related texts) are Ex
Monsteria (by Wytwornic) and Phantasmagoria. Also there is the Nomenclator Animanticum (unknown author),
Historica Monstorum (a modern publication by Pellwick), De Dinpiscibus (on sea-nickers and kraulschwimmen by
Aldrovand), Labyrinthion (an ancient text on teratology by Stabius and translated by Wünderhuber) and the strange
and antiquated Historie of Fourfeeted Beastes by Topsell — to name but a few. Clysmosurgical Primer is a learned
and rare book on the actual techniques involved in transmogrification (surgery making a person into a lahzar)
complete with diagrams. Its sources are the ancient and even rarer writings of the Phlegms and most particularly the
Cathars, now extinct races known for their skills and learning in such things. This is not a proscribed book as such in
the Empire, but owning one is a sign of dabbling in unusual, esoteric things. Because of what is deemed dangerous
content or encouraging outramour, it is illegal to sell many of these within the Empire, though not necessarily to own
them. The banning of books is an inconsistent practice, with each state interpreting the laws differently, and it tends
to be the paleologues (the “ancient texts”) that suffer the most restrictions. People of yore often thought very
differently of the race of monster than folk of the Half-Continent do now.

Bookday Rossamünd's birthday, as it is for every ward of Madam Opera's Estimable Society for Foundling Boys
And Girls. See entry in Book One.

bossetation making gardens (what we would call landscaping). Though the making and planting of gardens might
seem a worthy and peaceful pastime, its main purpose is to expunge the threwd, to keep the land tame.

bossock also known as mayotte, the basic well-fitting proofed-silk (soe) harness of the calendars and one of their
most distinctive items of apparel. It is made close to allow free movement and, while it prevents moderate
lacerations, thicker items of proofing must be worn over it to give better protection.

Brandenard language of the Brandenards, the race who populate much of the northern Soutlands and have
contributed much to the exploration and expansion of the Empire's mercantile and geographical interests; the HalfContinent equivalent of English. In HIR 1311 the Imperial declaration on the languages of its subjects, "The Correct
Sounds to Instruct the People," officially recognized Brandenard as the vulga lingua — the common language among
the peoples of differing states and even countries, the tongue of trade. Tutin, however, was declared — and is still
regarded — as the language of education and politics.

Brandenbrass major city of the Grume. See entry in Book One.
bravo(es) generally any hired killer, but also used specifically to describe what we would call assassins; also
known as pnictors or pnictardos (“stranglers”).

Briary, the ~; Briarywood small thorny woodland that stubbornly grows about the eastern end of the
Pettiwiggin. It has been allowed to remain, as a source of firewood and small timber for the needs of both
Winstermill and Wellnigh House.

bright-limn(s) small portable seltzer lights. See Book One.
Brisking Cat, the ~ wayhouse on the highroad of the Conduit Vermis, and one of the longest established in the
Idlewild. Situated near the confluence of the Mirthlbrook and the Bittermere, it was founded three generations ago
by the father of the current enrica d'ama, Madam Oubliette. The family of Parleferte (said “Par’ leh’fert”), her
steward, has served there for as long as the “Cat” has been open. A popular billet for many teratologists. Ever prone
to grumbling, local townsfolk will complain bitterly of the coxcombry and inconvenience of knaves when they are
bunked in the townships. It's all very tedious. They want the work but not the persons who do it, so most pugnators
prefer to stay in knaveries, cot-rents or wayhouses and avoid the nonsense.

brocander(s) sellers of secondhand clothing, particularly proofing.
bruicle tool of physics used for holding blood, made usually of glass or porcelain. Teratologists and
punctographists use them too for storing cruor. The arrangement of one bowl inside another within a bruicle
insulates the stored blood, keeping it viable for longer and making it ideal for carrying cruor back to your friendly
neighborhood punctographist. See graille(s).

bully-dicey what we would call a meat pie.
burge(s) small flags for signaling, made in sets of distinct patterns for the representation of letters, numbers,
cardinal points, titles of rank or social elevation, even whole words. The color of a burge is first and foremost for
distinction, though the meaning of the colors can be inferred if a small multistripe, multicolored flag — known as a
parti-jack — is flown with them. Burges are used for both civil and military purposes on land and the vinegar seas.

C
caladine also aleteins, solitarines or just solitaires; calendars who travel long and far from their clave spreading the
work of good-doing and protection for the undermonied. The most fanatical of their sisters, caladines are typically
the most colorfully mottled and strangely clothed of the calendars, wearing elaborate dandicombs of horns or
hevenhulls (inordinately tall thrice-highs) or henins and so on. They too will mark themselves with outlandish
spoors, often imitating the patterns of the more unusual creatures that their wide-faring ways may have brought onto
their path. Claves tend to confine their actions to a defined jurisdiction known as a diet, and customarily seek
permission to enter another clave's diet. However, caladines have a unilaterally agreed right to travel freely from one
diet to the next, though it is considered polite and proper to visit with the august while you are there. Sometimes a
caladine is called by the local laude to produce credentials before getting an affirming nod.

calanserie, calanserai, calansery headquarters and home of a calendar clave, and therefore also called a
cariary. Usually situated well away from urban buildup, out in more rural places where there is a greater need for the
calendar's work, though there are a few notable exceptions: the oldest clave-homes are found near cities and there are
even calanseries in Catalaine, Millaine, Ives and Chastony. Calanseries are typically fortified against assault from
both monster and man, especially given that several are home to sequesturies as well.

calendar(s) sometimes called strigaturpis or just strig — a general term for any combative woman; the Gotts call
them mynchen — after the do-gooding heldin-women of old. Calendars gather themselves into secretive societies
called claves (its members known as claviards), constituted almost entirely of women, organized about ideals of
social justice and philanthropy, particularly providing teratological protection for the needy and the poor. They
usually live in somewhat isolated strongholds — manorburghs and basterseighs — now as calanseries. Some claves
hide people — typically women — in trouble, protecting them in secluded fortlets known as sequesturies. Other
claves offer to teach young girls their graces and fitness of limb in places known as mulierbriums. Calendars,
however, are probably best known for the odd and eccentric clothing they don to advertise themselves. Over the
years a distinct nomenclature has emerged for the various “trades” within a calendar clave, for example:
¨
¨
¨
¨
¨
¨
¨
¨
¨

fulgar = stillbine
wit = pathotine
dexter = cacistin
skold = pharmacine
scourge = cheimin
bane = sceptine
sagaar = purrichin
pistoleer = spendonette
leer = astatine.

All kinds of teratologists form secret societies, but calendars are one of the few who generally seek the welfare of
others. The calendar ranks in descending order are:

¨ carline — rare, revered and retired, sought for wisdom and adjudication
¨ august — the head of a clave
¨ laude — the second in charge and herald of the august
¨ cantin — assistant to the laude, lifeguard of the august
¨ caladine — equivalent in rank to a tome (but operating alone and errant)
¨ tome — leader of a number of chapters and pagins
¨ chaptin — fully approved and initiated sister
¨ pagin — initiate serving probationary period, entry-level
See Appendices 2 and 3

calendine of or pertaining to calendars.
Callistia, Damsels of ~ fabled beauties from the Heldinsage, everliving beauties dwelling in the autumn-lands of
the urchin-lords. Many tales of love unrequited and rapacious appetites and much misery surround them. The salient
lesson in the histories of not putting too much stock on physical beauty is lost, however, on modern folk. For the idea
of these mythic ladies has given rise to parades known as Callistia or callic-shows, beauty galas with awards for the
most poised, graceful, well-turned out and rational girl in the show.

cantebank(s) peregrinating songsters and prosodists who also sell their talent for words to pen panegyrics for
teratologists wishing to boast of their skills either to prospective employers or to be read out in a common room or
other public place.

cantus properly call the cantus-and-laude, this is the creed by which a calendar clave lives and dies. Often it is
rendered in abbreviated verse form so that it stays in the mind. Calendars are continually indoctrinated with their
cantus till obedience to it is reflexive. The In Columba Alat is an excellent example of a cantus, and each clave will
have its own variation of such a creed. See In Columba Alat.

carum, dust-of- ~ pronounced “kar’room,” one of the parts that go into the making of Craumpalin's Exstinker. It
comes as a gray powder made from the dried and ground buds of a type of seaweed commonly found along the entire
southern coast of the Half-Continent. The dust is a common base for many powdered scripts.

caste small, fragile flasks usually made of glass or delicate porcelains designed to fracture when dashed against a
hard surface. These are used to hold liquid potives that burst and react violently when released. Castes have to be
stored and carried in padded receptacles; a salumanticum, for example, will have a reinforced pocket as part of the
inner linings, divided into softly cushioned slots in which individual castes can be kept. Another method of carrying
them is in a digital, a small, sturdy, well-cushioned container, usually of tin or pewter or wood, worn handy on a belt
or in a pocket, into which four or five castes can be kept for easy use. There are some different types of digital, and
they are common accoutrements of a well-prepared hucilluctor.

castigation(s) (noun) severe punishments starting with time in the stocks and moving on to increasing strokes of
the lash. (noun) period in the afternoon when defaulters are named and their punishments determined. These will
typically be impositions; only very rarely will actual castigations be given, despite the grim name — only for larceny
or brawling or some gross dereliction of duties. Prentices are often threatened with castigations, but these are empty
threats (not that the prentices are usually aware of this) to keep them well in line.

cathared to be made into a lahzar, to have undergone transmogrification.
Cathar's Treacle also called plaudamentum; draught imbibed by lahzars — both wits and fulgars — to keep their
introduced organs from rebelling inside their bodies. See entry in Book One.

catillium, catillium-hat round, broad-brimmed, squat-crowned hat, usually made of straw and lined with felt.
catlin also called a catling; a long-bladed, long-handled surgical knife, sharply pointed and double-edged. The
preferred too in amputations and the making of major incisions.

Childebert one of Rossamünd's fellow prentices; a fairly quiet but capable lad who paid Rossamünd little mind as
they shared their lives in Winstermill.

Chill often used as a synonym for winter, but more specifically referring to the coldest months in the year —
Pulchrys, Brumis, Pulvis and Heimio, considered usually an ill-time for travelers.

chymistarium or test-barrow; cupboard or portable barrow where skolds and their ilk can make their potives.
Very compact, with ingenious drawers and foldable sections, an entire miniature test crammed into as small a space
as possible. Skolds may port the cupboard variety on a cart or carriage to take about with them or pull the barrow (or
hire some sturdy rough to pull it for them) to make what they need when they need it. Not to be confused with a test
itself, which is a whole room and its tools given to this purpose.

cicuration said “kick-u-ray-shun”; determined process of bringing the wilds under control by farming and
cultivation, by digging and cutting and landscaping, and by colonization to bring the land fully under everyman
control. It is a slow form of taming, but its effects are deep and long lasting. Even so, some places refuse to be
brought under heel — such as the Harrowmath, large parts of the Mold, the Frugelle and so on. See also the Idlewild.

claustra small booths used in the more fancy alehouses, coffeehouses, wayhouses, tomaculums and any other such
public place, made to seat no more than four comfortably. Designed to provide a modicum of privacy to guests, they
were originally used in the less salubrious establishments to allow nefarious conversation to happen somewhat
publicly without being too public. As is so often the case, the fashions of the wealthy romanticize and ape the daily
realities of the less well-heeled, who in turn copy things they like from those of higher station — and so it goes
around.

clave(s) group of calendars, particular and distinct, set to protect a defined area. A clave has its own unique mottle
and spoors that its phrantry are expected to wear at all times with pride. Calendars in general hold to universal
beliefs and rules, but a clave is free to emphasize or add bits as they see fit. The augusts of all the claves in a region
may meet every so often to coordinate and bond. There is normally no real animosity between claves, and caladines
tend to be the glue that keeps it all one big happy family.

Clementine capital city of the whole Empire; some may use the name Clementine when referring to the Emperor
and his ministers as a collective; a general term for all the powers that govern the Empire. See entry in Book One.

clerk(s) at Winstermill these are essentially civilians with a military rank; few states have professional military
staff. Given this, the most preferred clerks are concometrists, the combat-clerical graduates of athenaeums such as
Inkwill, who are highly trained in both paper shuffling and the stouche.

clerk-master another rendering of the title Master-of-Clerks, slightly less formal and typically allowable in use
only by those of a higher rank.

coach-host harbor for post-lentums and other public carriages situated at a convergence of routes, where a
passenger can while away minutes and hours either eating and drinking in the refectory or sitting and waiting in the
parenthis. Coach-hosts are not wayhouses: they have no facilities to accommodate travelers, though folk are allowed
to sleep in the parenthis if they wish, at no charge, sitting on hard benches and locked in at night with limited access
to the jakes or refreshments and no bedding. Still, for those short of money this is a better option than a night
exposed on the streets or in the wilds.

color-party small group bearing the colors before a body of soldiers. A typical color-party holds the colors — the
flag that signifies the pride of its soldiers — and the pensills — the person pendants of the officers in charge of that
unit. A marshal's color-party will also carry the spandarion. With the color-party will also go a drummer boy and a
fyfesman beating time and encouraging their comrades with martial music.

Columbine(s) calendars belonging to the Right of the Pacific Dove.

Columbris calansery and sequestury of the Right of the Pacific Dove who otherwise call themselves Columbines,
from the Tutin for “dove.”

combinade(s) hand arms that are a clever combination of mêlée weapon and firelock. The firing mechanism on
most combinades is an improved wheel lock, being more sturdy than a flintlock, and able to take the jars that come
when the weapon is used to strike at a foe. Added to this, the lock mechanism, trigger and hammer are usually
protected by gathered bands of metal, a basket much like those protecting the hilts of many foreign swords. When
edges and bullets are treated with gringollsis, combinades become very effective therimoirs (monster-killing tools).

commerce men smugglers and other such illegal traffickers working in concert with some kind of centralized
leadership or organizer, an unduly respectable title for a very unrespectable lot. It is applied, a tad sarcastically, to all
such folk whether they belong to an actual commerce society or not.

compeer how one peer may refer to another.
compliment what we would call a toast, when glasses are filled and touched together as things are declared and
wished for.

Compter-of-Stores

chief accountant of Winstermill, apparently of equal rank to the Master-of-Clerks, though in practice
very much under the latter's sway.

Conduit Felix, the ~ reputed to be the longest highroad in the Empire, reaching from Clementine, the Imperial
Capital far in the north, through the very midst of the Grassmeer and on to Andover in Hergoatenbosch. The Conduit
Felix is used to mark the separation of the Grassmeer into the Ager Magnus on the eastern side and the Solum
Magnus to the west.

Conduit Vermis, the ~ proper name of the Wormway. See entry in Book One.
confectioner any seller of potives, whether skold, hedgeman or simple shopkeeper; also sometimes call fartiros
(“makers of potpourri”), an ancient Tutin name for skolds given them when the first rhubezhals arrived from across
the eastern mares.

confustication confusion or fight, particularly a wild brawling fight or a fight that has turned out badly.
Considine, the ~ one of the alternats or subcapitals situated at strategic places within the Haacobin Empire.
Alternats were founded to allow the Empire to keep greater control over its subject states, most of which lie beyond
inveterately threwdish land, well past easy reach. Large armies and navies are kept at each alternat, ready to venture
forth and chastise any overweening state or peer or defend the lands against the monsters. In the Soutlands, the
Considine is the larger, older and therefore senior of two alternats, the other being the Serenine, farther south.

corser(s) grave robbers and traffickers in dead bodies for the service of high-paying massacars and all the rest.
Probably their best-known tool-of-trade is the corpse-fender, a long pointed pole driven into the mold to test the
location of a possible grave. Apart from the dangers of monsters and the ever-vigilant obstaculars and revenue
officers, you might also come into conflict with other corsers over a prize tomb. Edgar Shallow, a somewhat wellknown corser, wrote a book on the subject; part treatise, part sage advice, part fictional license — The Ashmonger's
Almanac. Other books on the subject include Codex Necropoli by Tichanus, an old catalog and guide to all the
known cemeteries of the Old World (recent revisions by Tidswell include references to Turkeman grave sites); and
Fossae Magnum (or “The Book of Graves”), a treatise on the trade of the corser with a cursory guide to the main
cemeteries in the larger cities. See corsers in Book One.

costermen small-time traders who travel about selling fruits and vegetables and any other foodstuffs they might
have.

Cothallow built between Makepeace and the Three Stile Junction, this is one of the best cothouses on the

Wormway, with a reputation for smartness and punctuality and for the comforts of its cot-rent. The lighters serving
there are a happy bunch (as lighters go), flourishing under an uninterrupted string of competent, good-natured housemajors.

cothouse(s) type of fortalice, the small, often houselike fortresses built along highroads to provide billet and
protection to lamplighters and their auxiliaries. Cothouses are usually built no more than ten to twelve miles apart, so
that the lamplighters will not be left lighting lamps and exposed to the unfriendly night for too long. Their size goes
from a simple high-house with slit windows well off the ground, through the standard structure of a main house with
small attendant buildings all surrounded by a wall, to the fortified bastion-houses like Haltmire on the Conduit
Vermis or Tungoom on the Conduit Felix. Sometimes called a little manse.

coty gaute pronounced “co’tee gort,” a delicate pastry from the Patricine stuffed with quail cooked so long the
bones are edible.

course (verb) to hunt, particularly to hunt monsters. (noun) the hunt itself, usually referred to as a coursing-party,
or in such phrases as “to go on a course.” A course is, obviously, a dangerous affair. One undertaken lightly will
always result in the doom of some, if not all, of those involved. A prospective courser is always advised to take at
least one skold and one leer — or, if they are unavailable, a quarto of lurksmen, even a navigator or wayfarer, and a
hefty weight of potives and skold-shot. Not to be confused with “corse,” meaning (of course) a dead body, a corpse.

court-martial a court or tribunal made up of military or navy officers who try their own for any offense committed
by pediteers or vinegaroons against military — and even sometimes Imperial — law; a martial court rather than a
civil court (court-civil), where everyday folk are tried. To be subject to a court-martial does not necessarily mean
being cashiered from one's chosen service; the tribunal of officers in a court-martial have to establish guilt or
innocence, just as in a civil court. Therefore you can be tried in a court-martial and be found innocent and so return
to service.

crank in habilistics this term is used to mean something that is of dubious or unknown origin and/or effect,
something made with little skill and giving little real benefit; it is also used to refer to something that is broken or
impaired in some way.

crank-hook(s) another name for fodicars, so given for the blunt spike sticking from one side that is used to wind
the mechanism of a seltzer lamp to draw out the bloom into the seltzer water.

Craumpalin's Exstinker nullodor made by Master Craumpalin for Rossamünd, which Rossamünd is meant to
apply frequently; he works hard to do so, keeping a careful eye on how much he has used and how much he has left.

crinickle bonnet of muslin or silk worn by women to bed at night to keep their hair in place during the night's
sleep.

Cripplebolt cothouse situated on the Frugelle built atop the ruins of an ancient Burgundian tollhouse; most famous
for the horse-stud kept within the old, still-intact cellars protected by three sets of strong doors and the vigilant
maintenance of powerful nullodors. The stocky nags bred there are not the sleekest beasts, but they still pull a load as
they are meant to.

Critchitichiello, Mister itinerant ossatomist hailing originally from Seville who finds life down in the cooler
climes of the Soutlands more to his liking because people are not so aware of his unusual past, and rumor so far has
not managed to follow him across the Grassmeer. A ledgermain of natural gifts, he is talented at basic skolding too,
and has made a comfortable living in the less traveled habitations of the Empire's southern conquests.

Crofton Wheede prentice-lighter. See Wheede, Crofton.
cruor monster's blood once it has been taken from the beast.

cruorpunxis monster-blood tattoo. Though cruor is used to mark a monster-slayer, this is not because of any
special properties in the blood of a dead monster over the blood from a live monster (ichor). It is simply that getting
a bruicle of blood from a still-living nicker might seem a difficult task: the author would defy anyone to attempt it
and come away whole. See Book One

curricle light two-wheeled cart or carriage usually pulled by a team of two horses or, in a pinch, a pair of strong
mules or donkeys — though at a slower pace.

cursor(s) mathematical clerks employed for their ability to count and arithmecate (do all manner of sums) quickly
and without the aid of counting devices.

D
dancing calendar(s) more properly calendine sagaars.
dandicomb(s) large, gaudily decorated “novelty” hats, designed to attract attention. Worn almost exclusively by
teratologists, dandicombs declare very much that the wearer is serious about killing monsters. They come in a
variety of forms with wings (ailettes), horns, multiple crowns, twisted crowns,; whatever the imagination of the
wearer, the depth of his or her purse and the skill of the milliner might conjure.

dandidawdler(s) rich, affected men who dress expensively in fussy, frilly threads; those of the modern
fashionable set know as fluffs. See Appendix 4

dark trades illegal trade of body parts and monster bits. See entry in Book One.
day-clerk(s) in cothouses much of the clerical work — filing of indents, sorting of work cards, auditing of stores,
concatenation of papers — is in the hands of one person, the day-clerk, who may have an assistant, if he or she is
fortunate. Day-clerks are also responsible for the transit of mail through their station and the dissemination of the
same to and from postmen serving the area.

day-watch watch in a cothouse responsible for guarding their billet and the sleeping lantern-watch and the
immediate road during the day; for driving off monsters from their stretch of the way; for aiding in the chastising and
apprehension of lurchers and other commerce men; for participating in fatigue parties either on ditch duty or as
laborers themselves; and for whichever other duties might present themselves for the doing. At determined intervals
that vary with the needs of each house, the day-watch and lantern-watch will swap duties, making it a long day for
the previous day-watch and a shortened vigil-day for the relieved lantern-watch.

Dead Patch, the ~ the common grave of the lamplighters and auxiliaries in Winstermill. Indeed there are many
graveyards throughout the Half-Continent and beyond with this name. A noteworthy feature of the one in
Winstermill is that the dead are buried feetfirst — standing upright, as it were — to conserve room, so that as many
as possible might be interred there.

degree another term for the situations of social status and rank. The highest degree is a duke / duchess, then march
/ marches, followed by a count / countess, then viscount (or reive) / viscountess (or revine), after which are baron /
baroness, then companion / companionine, then armige (or esquire) / armigine and finally gentleman / gentlewoman.
Each degree above companion may be referred to as “lord” or “lady,” and those below as “sir” or “dame.”

Dereland the vast southeastern continent beyond the Loquor and the Mare Periculum (Gramlendenmeer), a region
which includes the Hagenlands, the eoned home of the Gotts before they were driven out by the Hagenards.

diet the defined range of a calendar clave's — and therefore its august's — influence as stipulated by the clave's

Imperial Prerogative (a commission from the Emperor). Any calendar entering another clave's diet must seek
permission either from the laude or the august herself, depending on circumstances.

dispensurist(s) in Winstermill, dispensurists occupy a rank between sergeant and under-sergeant, meaning they
are one step down from a leer and therefore subordinate to the same. See entry in Book One for more on
dispensurists in general.

distinct acid(s) acidic scripts made especially for a reactive corrosion upon contact, properly known as mordants.
ditchland(s) also known as fossis, ditchlands are the last march of human habitation, being disputed territory
where men and monsters vie for control of the land. Essentially you could think of a ditchland as the “front line” in
the never-ending war between everymen and üntermen.

doglock heavy firearm, somewhere between a pistol and a carbine in length, and often with a very large bore. Also
known as a hauncets, they make excellent salinumbus.

dolly-mop(s) a fairly recent social innovation, these are working girls of a city or town, ones living for fun and
fashion, using their self-earned income in pursuit of the same.

Dolours, Lady ~ pronounced “doll-loors,” a powerful calendine bane and the laude of Syntychë, the Lady Vey
and protectress of Threnody. Her origins are uncertain; she perhaps comes from the Patricine state of Vauquelin or
Haquetaine. Only a handful of years younger than the Lady Vey, she arrived at Herbroulesse as a teen, already well
along the path of skolding. There she was so well cared for by Syntychë's mother (the existing Lady Vey) and by all
of the Right that she willingly transmogrified to become the personal protectress of the heiress of the clave — a
young Syntychë herself. Dolours is the oldest serving friend of her mistress, and though she does not agree with all
Syntychë does or says, she remains fiercely loyal to her, taking on the role of spurn to Threnody, the next heiress of
Columbris, with pride (even though in some ways this is a demotion). There are rumors about, vague hints that
Dolours has been spied in conversation with monsters, suspected of discerning between monsters that must be slain
and those that should be spared, of being affected with outramour. All of this is conjecture, and the bane herself
remains taciturn when asked: what business is it of others? It is unknown if the title of “lady” is a courtesy or a
declaration of rank, and Dolours has never sought to clarify this either way.

domesticar(s) pediteers in the employ of a particular individual, serving as the personal guard and even army of
the same.

Dovecote, the ~ also known as Herbroulesse or Columbris; the home and headquarters of the Right of the Pacific
Dove, gaining its name from the title of the calendar clave living within.

Dovecote Bolt cothouse situated nearest to the Dovecote and one of the smallest cothouses on the Wormway,
known as the Bolt by its inhabitants; an unremarkable billet, and notable only for its proximity to the incidents
involving Numps and his fellow seltzermen.

Drüker derived from the Gott word for “crush,” the name of one of Winstermill's fourteen tykehounds, and their
curregitor. See tykehound(s).

Duke of Sparrows, the ~ also called the sparrow-king or sparrow-lengis; urchin (see entry in Book One), and
one of those known as a nimuine, or monster-lord, who have sway over the behavior of the lesser monsters about
them. Though most do not believe he exists, the common myth states that the sparrow king is a friend of the Duke of
Crows. He is said to hold court in the woods of the Sparrow Downs, resisting the conquering actions of those
monsters set against the realm of everymen. Even so, reputed autumn-land or not, few dare to venture too far into the
Downs. People of the Haacobin Empire have dismissed the ancient foolishness that there are two kinds of monsterlord: the nimuines who are kinder, seeking to benefit everymen, and the cacophrins or tlephathines, who seek their
own ends and the destruction of everymen.

dust-of-carum see carum, dust-of- ~.

dyphr said “die’ferr,” from the Attic for “seat” or “chair”; a light, two-seater, four-wheeled carriage with a high
dashboard, open-topped and open-sided before the driver and with the back wheels much greater in diameter than the
front wheels. Built for speed and recreation, it is driven by the owner, with no lenterman's seat at the front. For
inclement weather, a foldable top can be pulled over the occupants, and higher sides can be folded up to help protect
against a theroscade, though a hasty retreat is a dyphr's best protection.

E
einsiedlerin the Gott word for an eeker, those people living by choice or imposition on the fringes of society. See
eeker in Book One.

Emperor's Own Lighters the formal and glorious title of a lamplighter in the service of the Haacobin Emperor.
Declared boastfully to the listener, it is used particularly by lighters when referring to themselves.

Empire, the ~ meaning the Haacobin Empire of current rule or the Sceptics whom they overthrew. See entry in
Book One.

enkle Gott for “grandson,” a name kindly old Gott folk sometimes give to any young person.
epimelain pronounced “eh-pihm-eh-layn” or “eh-pihm-eh-line” and sometimes shortened just a little to pimelain;
also known as an abergaile, a person we would call a nurse, employed in infirmaries and sequesturies to tend to the
routine cares of the sick and recovering; regarded as a superior class of maid.

Eugus Smellgrove see Smellgrove, Eugus
eurinine(s) said “yoo’rah’neen”; the original monsters who were granted the capacity to make life come from the
earth. In some texts they are written of as the Primmlings — the first. All the nimuines, tlephathines and cacophrins
were once of these kind — or so some antiquated sources say.

everymen people, humankind.
Evolution Green also called Evolution Square; the oblong space south of the Grand Mead in Winstermill
designated for marching and other drills of movement.

evolution(s) training in the correct movements in marching and the right handling of weapons and other
equipment. Evolutions are taken very seriously in military organs, especially in armies, where pediteers are drilled
over and over in all the marches and skills required until they become a habit. Failure to perform evolutions
successfully is punished, sometimes severely, and this is usually enough to scare people into excellence. Evolutions
form part of a hierarchy of military motions and drill starting with manual exercises (individual drill), evolutions
(quarto and platoon movements), great exercises (company and bastion movement), and maneuvers (on concerto
movements of regiments or forces of greater size). To evolve is to be put through drill maneuvers such as marching
or handling weapons.

Ex Monsteria also known as the Liber Beluafaunis or “Book of Monsters”; an exceedingly rare tome written by
the eminent and assassinated scholar and Imperial teratologist Hubritas Whittwornicus of Wörms or, more simply,
Wittwornick. It is considered the most learned and thorough study of theroids, but is unofficially considered a
banned book for the dubious conclusions Wittwornick comes to about the nature of the ancient foe. It is so hard to
get, however, that few but the most learned know of it, and fewer still have a copy to read. A thoroughly abridged
form exists — The Incomplete Book of Bogles — but even this is regarded as containing sedonitious information
despite the truncation of its contents.

expungeant(s) another rendering of expunctants; those scripts that slay instantly.
Exstinker the nullodor made by Craumpalin for Rossamünd before he left Madam Opera's, given to him to keep
our hero “...safe from sniffing noses.” See Craumpalin's Exstinker and nullodors in Book One.

F
fabulist(s) one practiced in and gaining income from the arts of sleight of hand, juggling and other feats of
prestidigitation. Also used to refer to artists and other image makers.

false-fire potives that cause kinds of chemical burning and melting; the glowing, often firelike reactions of these
same potives; chemical “flames” and burning.

falseman a leer whose eyes have been altered so that she or he can detect when another is being truthful or not.
See leers in Book One.

fascins said “fass’skins,” coming from infula fascia, the retardant-treated bandages or wrappings and covers worn
by scourges to protect them from the workings of their own chemistries.

fatigue party group of laborers, peoneers, and/or seltzermen set to manual labor. If a fatigue party ventures out
beyond its protective bounds, it will be accompanied by a quarto or more of pediteers and maybe a lurksman or leer.
Soldiers so engaged are said to be on ditch duty.

Fayelillian small northern Soutland state, north of Brandenbrass and directly west over the River Humour from
Sulk End; one of the states that during the Dissolutia (see Gates, Battle of the ~ in Book One) did not venture out
against the Imperial Capital. As a reward in HIR 1413 the new dynasty expanded Fayelillian's borders (much to the
disgust of her neighbors), elevated her existing peers, granted patents to the most eminent non-peer families and
bestowed hereditary responsibilities, such as the peerage-marshalsy given to the forbears of the Lamplighter-Marshal.
To common folk the people of Fayelillian have a reputation for gentle simplicity and hospitality greatly at odds with
their conquered ancestors, the fierce and indomitable Piltdownmen, who well over a thousand years ago vied with the
Brandenards, Burgundians and Wretchermen of aulde for control of the lands about the Grume.

fenceland also called sokes or scutis, fencelands are a marche or region of human habitation, where people have a
firm hold of the land but still come into frequent contact with monsters. See entry on marches in Book One.

fend any long pike or spear-like weapon with long barbettes or other crossing-pieces protruding perpendicularly at
the base of its head or along the shaft, manufactured so to prevent a nicker from pushing itself down the shaft.

Fend & Fodicar wayhouse in Bleak Lynche lovingly known by the locals as ‘the Pointy Sticks’ and run by a
kindly widow, Goodwife Inchabald — a large, socially fearless and universally genial woman, as all good enrica
d'amas should be. As the only wayhouse in the whole Frugelle, it actually does a stiff trade despite its remoteness.

fetchman also fetcher, bag-and-bones man, ashcarter or thew-thief (“strength-stealer”); someone who carries the
bodies of the fallen from the field of battle, taking them to the manoeuvra — or field hospital. Despite their
necessary and extremely helpful labors, fetchmen are often resented by pediteers as somehow responsible for the
deaths of the wounded comrades they take who often later die of their injuries. Indeed, they are regarded as
harbingers of death, sapping their own side of strength, and as such are kept out of sight till they are needed. Such a
thankless task. What we might call a stretcher bearer or orderly.

fettle mental fitness and stability, general soundness of attitude and emotion.

feuterer(s) the hundfassers, hound-hands or hundsmen who look after dogs in their kennels, feeding said animals
and mucking out their dwellings. Feuterers are usually required only in the care of tykehounds, which need special
care and calming, raised as they are to be nervous (and so to give quick alarm to the presence of a monster) and cruel
(so that they may not shy from attacking a monster). Nevertheless, even a half-decent feuterer and his fellow
hundsmen will train their charges to react only to monsters and not everymen.

file what we would think of as an office, where clerks labor and leaders complete all the necessary and burdensome
paperwork their positions require.

firing by quarto a platoon giving fire by division of quartos, each quarto firing separately while the other two
reload.

fish, fishing common, vulgar term for the sending of a wit; a corruption of frission.
Fitch attachable collar of feathers, themselves proofed or fixed into a gaulded cloth or buff lining and consequently
a kind of armor.

flammagon stubby, large-bore firelock used to fire flares high into the air. In a pinch it can double as a weapon,
but it is best suited as a launcher of bright signals.

flam-toothed saw medical tool used by surgeons to saw bones.
Flanchardt similar to shabraques but used on oxen, bullocks and other beasts of burden. It is made of lower
quality proofing but uses more layers to achieve comparable protection.

flash swell(s) idle rich young men who carouse and duel and woo the wrong women and are more trouble to the
city folk than all the monsters combined. See dandidawdlers.

fleermare meaning “the weeping of the sea,” an extraordinarily thick and drenching fog that comes in off the sea,
most commonly in more arid places, acting as the “waterer” of the land in the place of highly infrequent rains. A
fleermare can be so thick that it leaves everything dripping as if sodden by a good downpour.

Fleugh, Mister clerk of Winstermill, subordinate to Witherscrawl and very much in that man's sway.
Flint founded by a collective of Soutland states: a small but very wealthy non-Imperial state belonging unwillingly
to the Sigismündian hegemony of the Gotts and its allies. The first stop on the way inland to Sinster, it has grown
wealthy on gold and silver mining and on the trade of gretchens, which are most commonly found in waters off their
coasts, and has recently begun to expand its navy — each vessel having as its aft-lantern a beautiful gretchen pearl.
This militarism has people alarmed on all sides of the Pontus Canis, for a belligerent state could easily upset the fine
balance of power that currently exists in the south of the Half-Continent.

fluff(s) wealthy people, peers, especially those who dress showily. No one really knows for certain where the term
comes from; some suggest it is because of the continuing fashion for the well-to-do to wear all the kinds of expensive
furs and trim their hats and boots and even parasols with the same. See Appendix 4.

fodicar(s) (noun) also lantern-crook, lamp- or lantern-switch, pokepole or just poke; the instrument of
lamplighters, a long iron pole with a perpendicular crank-hook protruding from one end used to activate the seltzer
lamps that illuminate many of the Empire's important roads. The pike-head allows the fodicar to be employed as a
weapon — a kind of halberd — to fend off man and monster alike. The bunting-hook on the reverse side to the
lantern-hook can also be employed as a sleeve-catcher, making the fodicar a useful tool to parry and tangle fellow
people should the need arise.

fortalice any small, usually freestanding building built or reinforced for use as a fortification, seldom used to

garrison more than a platoon.

frank to be an accurate or “true” shot with a firelock; to shoot accurately.
Frazzard's powder one of a powerful set of repellents known as urticants, Frazzard's powder affects the mucous
membranes and eyes most, reacting sharply with the moisture to sting painfully and even burn, scalding the eyes and
rendering a foe permanently blind. Harsh stuff, by convention it is used only on monsters.

Friscan's wead one of the more common alembant treacles required to be taken by a wit. Its main purpose is to
stop those specific organs inserted into the cranium from driving a wit mad and vaoriating (See spasm, spasming in
Book One), witting anyone unfortunate enough to be near.

frission the collective and general term for the invisible energetic “pulse” of a wit; see wit in Book One.
fronstecum what we would call an eye-shade or visor, made of solid felt with a three-quarter-circle band of clothcovered bone that fixes about the head.

Frugal, the ~ starting in the hills about the lead mines of the Louthe, this small river is noteworthy as the largest
water source running through the Frugelle. Many tiny tributaries flow into it as it in turn flows into the Ichormeer,
running right by the wall of Haltmire and serving as that fortress's source of water before bending away to the
northeast and on into a great swamp.

Frugelle, the ~ great plain upon the western shores of the Ichormeer and the source of many small runnels and
creeks that feed the wet of that notorious bog. It gains its name from the lack of arable soil and little rain there,
moisture coming to the hardy plants and beasts by way of thick fleermares (fogs) off the Swash, the great bay to he
south.

fugous cankers terrible and contagious disease spread by sneezing and showing worst as excruciating, rupturing,
suppurating ulcers all over the body. Can be fatal if left unchecked, with the worst sufferers having to be shipped to a
pestilentarium or pestifery, isolated houses for the separation of the sick from the living. The best run pestiferies will
even treat and heal the sick held there; the worst are no better than prisons.

fulgar(s) lahzars that make powerful electrical charges in their body and use them to fight monsters. See entry in
Book One.

fulminant(s) potives that cause explosions and flashes and bursts of fire.
furtigrade secret staircase hidden in the cavities of a wall. Such things were once built into almost every structure
of more decent size, though now they are included only by request of the architect and builder.

fusil also known as a fuse or carabine or harquebus; a lighter musket with a shortened barrel that makes for simpler
loading, is less cumbersome to swing about in thickets and woodland and saves considerable weight. Its shorter
length also makes it handy as a club when the fight comes to hand strokes. This makes the fusil a preferred weapon
of ambuscadiers and other skirmishing foot soldiers, and also comes a-handy for the drilling of smaller folk in the
handling and employment of arms.

G
g the symbol for guise, the lowest monetary denomination in common currency of the Soutlands. See money in
Book One.

Gall, Foistin near relation to the Lictor of Winstermill, Foistin was not proving to have either much aptitude or
inclination for the lictoring trades (in which the Gall family has been a proud participant for thirteen generations) and,
after a little “playing of strings” by his relation, was afforded a place in the lamplighters of Winstermill.

Gall, Grizzelard Lictor of Winstermill, the continuer of a greatly esteemed family trade, who delights in
terrorizing the prentices with the power of this threat.

gallant monster-hunter, a more vulgar term than teratologist. Sometimes used to refer to venators (non-surgically
improved hunters of monsters) but is a general appellation too.

gargant any large nicker.
gaudery odd and colorful garb that many teratologists wear; actually, a stage term for the overdone costumes worn
in plays and other performances.

geese vulgar term for the smallest denomination of Imperial coin, the guise piece, often used as a general reference
to money of all kinds and amounts.

Gethsemenë blue glowing planet and one of the brighter heavenly bodies in the night. Not nearly as large as
Maudlin or Faustus, it gains its prominence for being, after Phoebë (the moon), the closest object in the cosmic sky.

Giddian Pillow see Pillow, Giddian.
glaucolog sweet-talker; the less-than-polite name give to politicians, ministers, bureaucrats, lobbyists, factors and
clerks — anyone in an official position who needs to persuade or coerce with words.

glimbloom see bloom.
Gomroon porcelain one of the finest kinds of porcelain, coming from the tiny kingdom of Gomroon far away on
the shores of the Sinus Tintinabuline. This place has grown rich and powerful almost solely from the export of its
much sought after tableware.

good-day gala-girls women of ill-repute.
Gotts the proud race of people living in the southeast of the Half-Continent, their ancestors — the Skylds —
coming once from far over the western waters, from the Hagenlands, driven out by crueler men and settling first in
Wörms (see entry in Book One). From there they spread, mingled and merged with the local wildmen and eventually
forged a small empire of their own to resist the rise of the Haacobins and the Sceptics before them. Gott, their
language — sometimes still referred to as Skyldic — is somewhat akin to German in our own world.

gourmand's cork also known as a throttle or gorge; the projecting ‘knuckle’ of cartilage in a person's throat, in
which is situated the vocal cords; what we would call the Adam's apple. It is called the gourmand's cork (a gourmand
being one who is a gluttonous or greedy eater) because of the tight sensation you can get there when feeling
nauseated, which vulgar folk hold is your throat trying to prevent or ‘cork’ any further eating.

graille(s) tools of a punctographist. A marker needs four particular utensils to make a cruorpunxis upon the skin.
These are the:
¨

guillion — also called an acuse or zechnennadel — the needle dipped in cruor and then pricked into the skin.

¨ orbis — in full, orbis malleus, a disc-headed mallet with which the guillion is tapped to puncture the skin and
leave a mark.
¨

sprither — the device used to extract the blood from a monster in the first place.

¨ bruicle — the container in which cruor is kept till needed and into which the guillion is dipped every twenty taps
or so to refresh the blood.
Other tools necessary to a punctographist are a notebook and stylus to take an observation of the fallen monster's face
(either by description or by the presence of a corpse — or the head at least). From this is then figured the design of
the mark, usually in consultation with the ‘markee.’

great-lamp(s) also called a vialimn, the roadside seltzer lamps that illuminate the conduits and conductors of the
world. They are larger, brighter and more robust than the street-lamps of the cities. In safer places, they are placed
about 400 yards apart, and in more wild lands from 200 to 300 yards apart, though this is not a hard rule. The action
of winding out the lamp is sometimes known as a hoist or lift-and-drop, each lamp requiring a different number of
hoists to wind out fully. A lamp that has not been fully wound does not really pose any problems, but simply cuts
down the amount of light thrown and is not good practice.

Greater Derehund(s) one of the larger breeds of tykehound with brindled hindquarters, a blunt, squarish snout
and small, sharply pointed ears; originally from Dereland (hence their name), where they have served for centuries as
defenders of everymen. Among the biggest of the tykehounds, the largest specimens can attain the size of a donkey
and are a genuine terror t the lesser kinds of monster.

gretchen(s), gretchen-globe(s) also called liaphobes or Phoebë's daughters (after a most famous collection of
them); giant, beautiful ‘pearls’ gagged up by kraulschwimmen. Formed in the bellies of the mighty sea-beasts in
much the same way as the small nacreous globes are made inside an oyster, their most remarkable trait is that, from
no cause the habilists can currently fathom, they glow naturally. The best, those considered flawless, are perfectly
round and glow with such intensity that they are hard to look at. By action of currents and the occult movements of
the sea-nickers, gretchens are found in greatest number along the Enne. Consequently the near-independent duchy of
Flint and its lesser neighbors have a monopoly on the ‘harvesting’ and trade of the beautiful globes. The smallest
liaphobes can be no bigger than a typical oyster-made pearl, but the largest known — the Great Gretchen, from which
all others take their name, which was found washed up on the shore of the Flintmeer after a mighty storm — was the
size of a cottage. The cause of much envy and, in the end, a terrible war, it was lost along with the Phoebë's
Daughters and a vast collection of the biggest liaphobes ever discovered. All those since found by the foolishly brave
divers — encouraged by the greatest wealth to be had from their labors — have never come close in size.

Griffstutzig the name given to the best canignavor of Winstermill 's tykehounds. Derived from the Gott for dimwitted.

Grindrod, Lamplighter-Sergeant ~ said “Grind’rod”; senior non-commissioned officer in charge of the
training of prentices at Winstermill. Covered with scars, he has, as he would put it, “survived more theroscades than
ye've had puddings on Domesdays.” He is a rough man but is genuinely concerned that the young souls he trains are
prepared well for the labors of a lamplighter, that they well understand the terrors they face and are ready to cope
with them.

gringollsis potives made to paste on to blades or coat the lead bullets of firelocks, making these better able to harm
a monster. See skold-shot.

gromwell inexpensive and barely effective restorative having the equivalent impact on the imbiber of a shot of
brandy, a warming jolt that does not last terribly long. Some who take it might also suffer the ‘runs’ and bouts of
austeration (meaning farting, taken from auster = ‘the south wind’).

Grystle, House-Major ~ once a highly successful captain of a ram. An indiscretion in money and being
outspoken about a clear tactical error of his commanding admiral on a blockade led to Grystle being broke (dismissed
of service). Finding himself a bachelor without hearth or immediate prospects, he chose the next best military service
(where folk are not fussy of your origins) and took the Emperor's Billion to become a lamplighter. Long years of
habit mean he quite naturally runs the small stone world of Wormstool like the wooden ones he was used to on the
vinegar seas. Indeed, he would tell you that there is little difference, both ram and cothouse being isolated in hostile
regions and beyond the smarts and skills of its watches. Grystle is tight-lipped about his origins and the navy in

which he served, though certainly by his accent and turn of phrase he is a native of the Grumid states (those states
whose shores lie on the Grume).

gudgeon(s) sometimes rendered ‘gudjins’; also called nandins (meaning ‘simpleton,’ ‘idiot’); man-made monsters
built by massacars (black habilists) from bits of people, animals, vat-grown organs, bits of machines and monsters.
The most common are the corpselike rever-men or revenants. The major objection to the manufacture of gudgeons is
that many body parts used once belonged to people, usually exhumed corpses. Massacars argue that this must be,
especially with the brain, for without this the gudgeon will not be in any way controllable or useful. Yet with the rise
of demand, kidnapping and murder have been employed to furnish the ever-needy black habilists, to the great sorrow
of many. Publicly the Emperor is set against black habilistics, though his ‘backroom’ opinion remains unknown.
The more common uses people find for gudgeons are:
¨ for scouring — also known as bog- or bogle-toiling or hob-baiting; he hunting and driving out of monsters
where the gudgeons are used both as the bait and the main tool of killing. There have been reports of teratologists
known as reveners who cart around packs of rever-men, keeping them obedient with special potives and using them
in this way.
¨

hob-rousing — See that entry.

¨

as guards for vaults and other sensitive, confined places.

¨ for intellectual pursuits, where black habilists tinker with the possibility of making a half-living thing. The
ultimate goal of this is to make a tractable super-human teratologist, a kind of logical progression from a lahzar, that
will fight on no matter how injured. The goal is to send such as these into the wilds to seek out the monsters where
they dwell and turn back the tide.
¨ in the search for longer life, perpetual youth; gudgeons and particularly rever-men are made by some for this
purpose.

gyrovague one who wanders; a hucilluctor, a wayfarer.

H
Haacobin Empire, the ~ see Empire, the ~ and the entry in Book One.
hackle(s) (noun) also called a fitch, a broad collar or shoulder-cape made of proofed fur; (noun) any fur or
unshaven animal hide that has been proofed. The gaulding process also affects the hairs themselves, adding to the
protection of the material. To gauld furs and keep the hairs, however, requires care and low apseric gaulds, of high
quality, which of course increases the cost of the hackle, making it accessible only to the wealthy.

hack-watch pocket watch used by vinegaroons on a marine vessel as an aid to navigation and to determining noon
by the sun.

Hagenards, Haganards, the ~ people of the Hagenland and much of the Derelands who, long, long ago, drove
the Skylds out of their homelands and across the western seas. The Hagenards took possession of Ald Skyld and the
Skylds took possession of what is now known as the Gottlands.

half-pay poker(s) older and worn-out lampsmen serving lighter duties either within a cothouse or on quieter
stretches of the road. The name ‘poker ’ is a somewhat derogatory reference to putting a lantern-crook — otherwise
known as a poke — into the ratchet workings of a great-lamp.

Hall of Pageants large meeting hall built in the southwestern corner of Winstermill's vast grounds. It is used for
all ceremonies, from the puncting of its victorious monster-slayers to the bestowing of commissions and other

noteworthy promotions and awards, and usually the Billeting Day parade, held amid much pomp and splendor for
each ‘batch’ of fully trained prentices. Situated by the Dead Patch, the hall has in its cellars and foundations the
tombs and sepulchers of its seniormost officers, who served with distinction over the century of its existence. Indeed,
the hall is said to be actually erected over the old grave site of the original fortification of Winstreslewe.

Hallow Sill commonly known as the Hagwood, the forest surrounding Herbroulesse, which takes its less than
friendly name from the very presence of the calendars, or hags, in that wood.

Haltmire very last fortress before the eastern borders of the Soutlands give over to the Ichormeer; built originally
as a bastion, dormitory and storehouse for the engineers and laborers attempting the enormous work of building a
road through the dread swamp. Not as large as Winstermill or the Wight, yet it is mighty enough to provide a
permanent foothold in the isolated and threatened lands — with a reputation similar to the manse's for impregnability.
Stationed there is the Warden-General, who has secondary command of the “ignoble end of the road,” and is the
highest-ranking officer of the lamplighters on the road itself, topped only by the Lamplighter-Marshal. Like every
other cothouse on the Wormway, Haltmire is undermanned, its company of pediteer auxiliaries reduced to one full
platoon and one at half-strength, its lighters down to a quarto, it thaumateers limited to two skolds. There was once a
fulgar employed there who was lost in the Ichormeer protecting the wife of the Warden-General as she desperately
searched for their young children gone missing in that wretched place. The lighters of Wormstool and Bleakhall
joined a greater and near futile search for the wife and daughters in which Haltmire's scourge was also lost and many
lighters and auxiliaries barely returned with their lives. Managing to at least save the Warden-General's middle child,
men of courage and a frank aim such as Aubergene proved their worth that day, and many were awarded by the griefstruck father. Situated so near to the southeastern city of Hurdling Migh, Haltmire gets most of its supplies from
there and is a stockpile of resources for the cothouses to the west.

hand strokes close combat where blows with hand arms such as swords or cudgels are exchanged. The opposite is
a “stand a pull,” that is, to trade shots (‘pulls’) over a distance.

harlock means, quite simply, ‘white hair.’ See Hermogenës, Cot-Warden ~.
Harrowmath, the ~ wide, boggy plain upon which Winstermill is situated, gaining its name from an ancient
intention to drain the area and replant it with crops. However, all attempts to run off water from it and mow it failed;
the water just kept seeping back and the grass resprouted stubbornly no matter what was done. Now it is left alone,
home to frogs and salamanders and small water snakes, egrets, herons and screaming curlews, coties (small quail)
and tiny hopping mice, and mown only occasionally to prevent it from becoming a perfect matted hiding place for
monsters.

Harrowmath Pike, the ~ another name for the Pettiwiggin. It gained the name ‘pike’ from the time when people
were taxed a toll for its use, levied at Wellnigh House when travelers went to pass through in either direction.

haubardier(s) essentially a heavily armored musketeer. See entry in Book One.
hauncet(s) very heavy barreled pistol that takes great skill and strong wrists to fire and delivers a heavy, crushing
blow of shot. Loaded with skold-shot they become deadly tools against the monsters.

hedge, hedgeman “part skold, dispensurist and ossatomist”; often not especially well versed in any of the three
trades, or particularly talented at one while offering the others out of need or sheer mercenary intent; one of the many
types of gyrovague wandering the Half-Continent and indeed the entire world offering services to any paying person.

Heil glassware high-quality glassware coming predominantly from the city of Tüngasil in the fabled southern
marches of Tüngusia in Heilgoland, the huge continent and empire south of the Gurgis Magna — the great southern
ocean. The glass is made from the extra-fine sands mined from beneath the permafrost of the steplands on the
borders of Magog.

heldin(s) mighty folk of ancient history who fought with the monsters, employing their infamous therimoirs to
keep the eoned realms of humankind safe; known by many collective titles, including beauts (common), haggedolim

(Phlegmish), herragdars (Skyldic), heterai (Attic), orgulars (Tutin), sehgbhans (Turkic): what we would call ‘heroes.’
The time of their supremacy, when they were relied on to stand in the gap between everymen and üntermen, is known
as the Heldinsage. Said to have begun with the Phlegms — those most ancient of forebears — and ended with the
Attics, their heirs, it was the time of Idaho, the great queen of the Attics, and Biargë the Beautiful, among many
other glorious and infamous folk and their usually tragic stories. Not all of the weapons of the heldins were
destroyed in the violent cataclysms that punctuated and finally concluded that time: many are said to remain, and are
most highly prized by collectors and combatants.

Herbroulesse also known as the Dovecote or Columbris; the home of the calendars of the Right of the Pacific
Dove. The original name of the old, moldering fortress that the Right occupied when they first moved into the region
at the Idlewild's beginnings.
Hereward westward. In the Half-Continent, although he usual north, south, east and west are common terms,
directions of the compass are often give more classical names:
¨
¨
¨
¨

north = nere, said “near”; also nout, said “nowt”
south = sere, said “seer”; also scut, said “scoot,” or sout, said “sowt”
east = vere, said “veer”; also est
west = here, said “heer.”

See “by the precious here and vere” in Book One.

Hermogënes, Cot-Warden ~ said “her-moj-anees”; once a native of Seville, far to the north, he has carried with
him for a long time the name harlock, which means simply ‘white hair,’ having been born with those unusually pallid
locks. Cot-Wardens are the senior-most sergeants (sergeant-master) of a cothouse.

Hinkerseigh said “Hink-ker-see”; a small city / large town in the Idlewild whose founding state is the Sangmaund
state of Maubergonne. It gets its name from its most prominent founding family, the Hinkers, and their grand
fortified high-house (a seigh). Hinkerseigh is most noted for its many water-driven mills and heavier industry, a
small copy of the original city of its founders — one of the more industrialized of the Soutland states.

hirsuite partially cured animal leather with the hair left on, the hair usually being shaved or trimmed short but not
removed. See rimple.

hob-rousing also known as sheboggery, or pit-fights; a recent invention of the affluent bored and a major customer
of the dark trades. Hob-rousing is the practice of pitting a gudgeon and nicker against one another and betting on the
outcome. Under the charge of a rouse-master, gents known as pit-bobs (or tractors) wrangle those beasts together
into a pit (10-plus-foot deep x 12-plus-foot wide), initially separated by bars. The barrier is removed and the two
allowed to stouche it out until one is left alive (with gudgeons usually proving the more aggressive but the less
robust). Gudgeons that survive for many bouts can gain a kind of fame among the hob-rousing regulars (the gamers
or cubes, who come to watch and wager, and the nullards or pigeons, who come only to watch), gaining names like
“the Matschig Mauler,” “Old Feisty” and such like, “Mary's Long-Dead Mother” being one of the more gruesome
and ironic appellations. Indeed, even some monsters who have survived for many fights have gained grudging
admiration. The rousing-pits are typically maintained by either a peer or magnate or by a cartel of mercators ( dark
trade bosses) — someone with the will and money to establish and maintain such a place. They will be found deep in
the foundations of a manor house (with tunnels and their entrances leading well away from the host) or some
abandoned hall or cave out in the country. Hob-rousing is a big money-spinner for the organizers, with fights
sometimes rigged in the rever-man's favor to give the spectator some much-need satisfaction against the monstrous
foe. Of course, if a rousing-pit is secreted out in the wilds, any gudgeon kept there will eventually attract nickers;
this, although highly risky, usually suits the organizer / owners, who will try to trap any monsters lurking near and
use them in the next fight.

Hognells, the ~ broad gray escarpment regarded as the natural division between the Idlewild proper and the poor
lands of the Paucitine. They form part of the range of hills rich in mostly as yet untapped ores: lead, copper and,
some say, even silver. Fossickers can often be seen ranging about the surrounding lands, sent by the big states to find
sources of these precious metals.

horrors, the ~ (noun) common term for threwd. (noun) lingering and malingering effects of pernicious threwd,
the sufferers remaining in a fragile, frightened and broken state. Some folks hold that those touched by the horrors
have a greater sensitivity to threwdish things and are more aware of the monstrous in the world around them. More
sensible people dismiss this as arrant rustic nonsense. The horrors are related to the blue ghasts, which is a more
darkly depressive state.

house-major more properly titled Major-of-House, this is the most senior-officer of a cothouse with charge over
all the doings therein and along the span of road put under his responsibility. If something happens to or along that
span, then it is his duty — and the duty of those he commands — to initiate a solution, whether it is road repairs,
clearing the verge, rescuing stranded travelers, hunting lurchers or brigands or monsters.

house-watch permanent staff of a cothouse who do not go out on the lantern-watch. These can include the housemajor, the day-clerk, uhrsprechman, the kitchen staff (if present) and the various trades and laborers required for
daily tasks such as tinkers, proofeners, seltzermen and the like. Some cothouses were once manned well enough to
possess a large house-watch of pediteers as well to relieve the day-watch at intervals and provide them with extended
rest.

hucilluctor(s) said “hyoo-sil-luck-tor”; a wayfarer. The word comes from the Tutin term meaning ‘hither and
thither.’

hugger-mugger one of the many synonyms for monster, referring to a common manner of attack among the
üntermenschen, which is to leap from an ambush — to ‘hug’ — and grapple closely with their prey — to ‘mug.’

huque said “hyook”; a long cloak with split sides to allow the wearer's arms free movement.

I
ichor when talking of cruorpunxis, a monster's blood when still inside it is known as ichor, and when extracted by a
sprither into a bruicle it is called cruor.

Ichormeer, the ~ great threwdish swamp to the east of Sulk and west of Wörms said to be the origin of monsters,
the place where they are ‘born’ from to terrorize the Soutlands.. See entry in Book One.

Idesloe calendar purrichin of the Right of the Pacific Dove, originally coming from Flint, and once speardame to
Sophia Idaho II, its ruling Duchess. The eldest purrichin, she is the mentor of the other sagaars of the Right, going
into a stouche bearing her ancient therimoir, a sword-of-wire called Glausopë — or ‘Asp's Tongue,’ a relic of the
Heldinsage.

Idlewild, the ~ officially known as the Placidia Solitus, a gathering of client-cities (colonies) along the Imperial
Highroad of the Conduit Vermis. Each town, village or fortress is sponsored by a different state of the Empire —
Brandenbrass, Hergoatenbosch, Quimperpund, Maubergonne, Termagaunt, even Catalain. Established in the late
fifteenth century HIR, it is the latest great project of what is grandly termed cicuration — taming by farming;
purgation — taming by force; and bossetation — taming by landscaping, originally proposed by Clementine himself.
The inner Idlewild or Placidine, from Tumblesloe Cot to the Wight, was declared ‘regio scutis’ — a fenceland —
over a decade ago. This heralded a brilliant success of the great labor of pushing back the monsters and the threwd.
The marches from the Wight to Haltmire — otherwise known as the Paucitine (also the Frugelle) — are still
considered ditchland. These two divisions of Placidine and Paucitine are known as themes, or military districts, the
western governed by Winstermill, the eastern by Haltmire, with the Wight situated at their meeting and concerned
only with the taxation of trade from Sulk.

“ignoble end of the road” title given to the remote and dangerous stretch of road that runs along the flat of the

Frugelle, beginning at the Hognells and ceasing at Haltmire, and to the cothouses found thereon.

IMIR in Ministerium Imperia Regnum (or Rex), meaning either “In Service to the Empire” or “In Service to the
Emperor”; the motto of any ministry or body working for the Haacobin Empire.

Imperial fumomath scourge, skold or dispensurist in the direct employ of the Empire; the term can be used to
refer to such skolds and scourges that are employed at Winstermill and elsewhere, but more properly means those
who serve in the Emperor's courts in Clementine, especially those tending to the Emperor himself.

Imperial Prerogative a mandate from the Most Serene Emperor granting limited yet often far-reaching rights to
certain individuals or groups (such as many calendar claves) allowing them to operate outside the governances or
interference of state or other local authorities. It can even be pushed (some might say abused) to allow things
contrary to the Imperial interest to proceed unhindered, such as the breaking of an Oath of Service.

Imperial Secretary highest ranked of all the Haacobin Empire's bureaucrats; men and women of great influence
and power, not so much because of their own rank, but because of the status of the ears and minds they have such
ready access to — the senior ministers of the Emperor, and even the great man himself. The favor of an Imperial
Secretary can be the making of you, their disfavor your ruin. Though often of common birth, they are typically
courted and feted by peers, especially the lowly ranked, and by gentry and magnates too, eager for some kind of
advancement or boon. One does not strive to be an Imperial Secretary for dreams and hopes of reform, but for the
sake of pure ambition and ego.

In Columbia Alat meaning “a dove's wing” or “the wings of a dove,” and also known as the Columbinale; the
cantus (or creed) of the calendar clave known as the Right of the Pacific Dove to which each adherent must ascribe
and swear:
Defend the oppressed where e’er thee can,
Defend the woman e’er ‘gainst man;
From thy own chattels another soul aid,
Clear the writs that cannot be paid;
Shelter the shelterless through heat or snow;
Set wings of Dove ‘gainst cunning crow.
Live thee rightly, ready to die,
Uphold the true, expose the lie;
Gentle yet strong, humble yet bold,
Guidance for young and succor for old;
And where e’er thee walk and whither thy go,
Set wings of the Dove ‘gainst monstrous foe.
Another version replaces ‘chattels’ in the third line for ‘labors’ — though the idea is held to be the same. Other
claves will have similar creeds, for calendars of any stripe live by such things.

Ingébargë pronounced “Ihng’geh’bee’arr’gee;” or Biargë the Beautiful, as she is commonly known, a powerful
creature who relishes the taste of vinegaroon and has lived as long as modern matter can tell. See Biargë the
Beautiful.

invidist(s) commonly thought of as loathards, those who utterly hate monsters, who feel theiromisia (deliberate
and pointed malice against teratoids), as opposed to those who feel a general dislike or habitual, mindless fear (the
average citizen of the Empire). Also know as aspex (typically in reference to a teratologist), theirmisers, execrats,
these are the inveterate enemy of sedorners.

ipse adversus as the Marshal says, this roughly means ‘standing alone’ and comes from “(ipse) solus adverso
malus,” literally, “(oneself) alone against the evil.”

“I will wait for thee / If thou wouldst come with me” a quote from “The Wide-faring Merchant,” also

called “The Plaint of the Merchant's Wife,” a popular tune heard the Soutlands over.

Off go thou to a fabled land,
To mystic Fiel and Samaarkand,
For prospect's grasp at money's hand
And that fortune's making;
I wouldst go with thee,
If thou wouldst wait for me.
We'll sit on plushest gala seats,
Eat mani-plattered sweetest meats,
A plethora of toothsome treats,
till our stomachs' aching;
I will wait for thee
If thou wouldst come with me.
We'd charter ram to Hagen ‘Sere,
Ply the mares to fartherst vere,
From Tintinabuline to Quimpermeer
and see the world a’passing;
Thou shouldst wait for me,
For I would come with thee.
And if I catch a morbid ill,
From Heilgoland's most wretched chill,
And spend my days on Death's doorsill
till morning turns to mourning;
Wouldst thou stay with me,
As I wouldst stay with thee?

J
jakes, the ~ toilets, also called heads (navy), or garderobe, water closet, the gong and the rest.
Josclin said “joss’lyn”; scourge of Winstermill. Hailing from Brandenbrass yet said to be descended from
Cloudeslee stock, that quasi-mystic land beyond the southern bounds of the Haacobin Empire, reputed to be
populated with sedorners and most famous for its deadly accurate archers — or toxothetes. Josclin does not elaborate
on his heritage and, as a scourge, has chosen a profession quite at odds with the principles of his reputed forebears.
He trained at the Madrigoll, the much-vaunted rhombus in Maubergonne, rather than at the Saumagora — or “Soup
Pot” — in Brandenbrass, won by the former's well-earned reputation for producing first-rate scourges. He so rarely
ventures forth without his fascins that though he has served with the lighters at Winstermill for nigh on a decade, only
a few of his fellows know what he actually looks like.

K
knave(s) (noun) the opposite of a spurn; broadly any teratologist who hires services out to the highest bidder or any
other paying customer, but used in reference to lahzars particularly — a nonlahzarine monster-slayer is sometimes
called a hack, because these nonsectified gallants have to ‘hack’ at a monster to battle it (as with a sword or cudgel or
the like). How this includes skolds (which it does) is unknown and also unquestioned. ( verb) to hire oneself out,
especially as a teratologist; to sell one's services.

knavery offices where a person can go to hire a teratologist or three or as many as are needed. Such establishments
gain their name from the term “knave,” that is, any person who sells services to any paying client, as opposed to a
spurn, who serves a retaining lord or master. When entering a region for the first time, a teratologist may register at
the local knavery to make it known that he or she is about and going on the roll offering services. In doing this
monster-hunters are agreeing not to shop their skills through other neighboring knaveries or their own advertisement,
thus denying the knavery its commission. The knaving-clerk will take a request from a customer and offer a
selection of monster-hunters they believe will solve the dilemma. Once the teratologist has been selected, he or she is
approached with an Offer of Work, which may be accepted or rejected. Work is more steady for teratologists who
use the knaving system, though they usually make less money for service rendered.

L
lackbrained empty-headed, slow-witted, not very bright or clever.
Lady Dry-stick vulgar term for an uptight, unfriendly, upper-class woman.
Lady Vey, the ~ see Vey, the Lady ~.
laggard(s) leers specializing in the detection of hard to see things and things far off, getting greater use out of a
sthenicon, which is made in part to enhance such senses, than a falseman.

lahzar(s) said “luh’zahr”; the premium monster-hunter, gaining peculiar and deadly abilities through surgery. See
entry in Book One.

lale short afternoon break usually held at 4 p.m., where the lantern-watch ready themselves to depart, taking a small
meal to help them on the road. The word is an antiquated rendering of "lull," a time of quietude.

"Lamp East Winst(ermill) x West Well(nigh House) y" system for designating the placement of a greatlamp on a highroad, x and y being the number of lamps away from a cothouse or other fortification.

lamplighter(s) pediteer responsible for the lighting and dousing of lamps along highroads, low-roads and any
other roads in between. One of the benefits of experience is knowing just how many winds it takes for each lamp to
be fully wound out, for not every great-lamp requires the same number of lift-and-drops to bring out the bloom.
Upon joining as a prentice, a lighter is issued with the following:
¨
¨
¨
¨
¨
¨
¨
¨
¨
¨
¨
¨
¨
¨
¨
¨

1 quabard, Imperial mottle
1 sash, twin-pattern, rouge blank and rouge and cadmia checks
1 fodicar, Scutid pattern
1 thrice-high, felt, black, with gaulded band
3 shirts, linen, white
3 longshanks, proofed, black
3 pair undergarments, white
3 pair trews or stockings
1 trencher, wooden
1 cup, tin
1 set turnery or cutlery
2 blankets, woolen
1 pillow, hay-stuffed
1 clasp-knife (for paring toe- and fingernails, cleaning fouled equipment)
lug-pipe, pewter (used in the cleaning of firelocks)
1 ox-trunk

Of course, if fellows possess equivalent items of their own, then these are employed instead, and they may expand
their equipment as they wish. At some cothouses each lighter is also issued with charges of repellents or blastes
(such as bothersalts, Frazzard's powder, salt-of-asper and the like) and given a little training in how to use them, thus
acting as his own skold. Every second lighter is also issued a record; a small book in which the disrepair of a lamp
can be recorded and left for the seltzermen to read and act upon. See entry in Book One and Appendix 7.

Lamplighter-Marshal, the ~ his correct title is the Eighth Earl of the Baton Imperial of Fayelillian. Though he
comes from a well-to-do family, an entire life spent in military service in close association with the common pediteer
has meant the Marshal has picked up their less-than-couth manners. He is the kind of leader who shows by example
and has fought several stouches in the front with his men, gaining himself their deep respect, several gruesome scars
and so small number of cruorpunxis. The rank itself is the highest possible for a lamplighter, an Imperial commission
that is usually only granted to peers — with the heroic Protogenës being a notable exception. In order for the
Lamplighter-Marshal to succeed at his tasks he is heavily reliant on the cooperation and skill of the ComptrollerMaster-General and with him the Master-of-Clerks to keep the more bureaucratical gears of the lighter's world
turning efficiently.

Lamplighter-Sergeant Grindrod see Grindrod, Lamplighter-Sergeant.
lamps collective noun for all lights, and particularly those that give light to streets and roads.
"A lamp's worth is proved by its color" also "a lamp's weal (health) is proved by its color," an old
lamplighter truism meaning that someone's moral value is proved by his or her actions, or "actions speak louder than
words." It comes from the idea that you can tell a seltzer lamp's condition by the color of the light coming through
the seltzer.

lampsman 3rd class the lowest rank of a properly qualified lighter, being the rank prentices are promoted to once
prenticing is done. See Appendix 6.

lampsman another name for lamplighters, meaning generally the non-officer ranks.
lamp-watch also called the lantern-watch; the nightly duty of moving along a stretch of road to light the lamps and
then spend many hours on watch in your bastion-house till early morn when you go out once more and put all the
lamps out again. After this it's a well-earned sleep during daylight hours. The term also refers to the folk involved in
the performance of the lamp-watch.

landgrave a rank of peer in the Lauslands, equivalent to somewhere between a duke and an earl of the Haacobin
Empire; essentially the now hereditary rulers of their lands, the ranks formerly granted by a long-gone dynasty of
kings when the Lauslands were once a part of Ing. Now they elect for themselves a valastin (chief elector) from
among their own, who rules for a set period and is responsible for those troubles of state that require centralized
governing. The Haacobins and the Sceptics before them have long coveted these fertile western lands of the
landgraves and have long waged war to get them. Yet they have never been able to prevail over their western
neighbors. The soldiers on those failed campaigns have claimed hat the monsters of those lands are actually working
in the favor of the landgraves and their peoples; the ministers back in Clementine dismiss this as an excuse.

landsaire also spelled landtseir, an organized group of lesquins of battalion strength or greater. Sometimes they
include “legio” or “legion” in the names, after the Tutin armies of old.

lantern-crook another name for fodicar.
lantern-span distance between great-lamps on a highroad, the agreed standard being 400 yards, though the lamps
themselves can be anything from 200 to 600 yards apart, depending on where in the road they are situated.

lantern-stick(s) mildly deprecating name for prentices given them by full-ranked lampsmen. It comes from the
name for the lighter wooden practice-crooks that are sometimes employed to help young would-be lighters in
winding a great-lamp's mechanism. It is also an insulting nickname infrequently give to fodicars by nonlighters.

lantern-watch another rendering of lamp-watch, used especially to refer to the period of duty itself rather than the
group of lamplighters.

lark-lamp also called a swadlimn, a 1:6 to 1:10 scale model of a great-lamp, used to instruct lamplighters on the
workings of the lights used along the Emperor's highroads. They are lights in their own right, fully functioning, with
the bloom capable of being wound in and out of the seltzer. Unlike bright-limns, however they do not suffer being
tipped about, such action generally causing them to spill seltzer water and foul up the fine gears of their workings.

laude assistant, voice and rod of the august of a calendar clave who knows all the comings and goings of the local
area. It is to her and her assistants that all appeals, requests and visitors must come before being referred to the
august for final arbitration. Highly capable and dangerous in her own right, a laude is the deliverer of all the censures
and commendations of her august and clave.

leakvane kind of tarbinaire, a potive composed of two parts that combine to make the required reaction.
Leakvanes themselves are small elongated boxes of thin light wood, designed to break apart, divided into two waxsealed halves between which is a heavy film of treated velvet that protrudes from the top of the box. When this tab is
pulled the two potives kept separate in either half mix together, and after anywhere from a few seconds to a minute
they will react with the desired effect. The best tarbinaires will have the expected time for reaction stamped on them,
and it is recommended never to shake one, as this can cause an almost instantaneous effect while the device is still in
your hand.

ledgermain(s) person who has learned skolding from books and not from another skold. Ledgermains are
considered grossly inferior to the genuine, once-prenticed article.

ledgerstone stone carved with pretty words commemorating the life of some noteworthy individual. They are
usually used as part of a floor or path, and sometimes are actually placed over the remains of the great personage.
What is remarkable about this is that the body is typically laid right out rather than placed vertically or crouched in
the fetal position. The latter is common practice in cities not wanting to dispose of the beloved dead outside the city
walls where monsters can dig the corpses up and corsers too, and where they need to conserve space in the tight
confines of the city itself.

leer(s) people who soak their eyes in remarkable concoctions to achieve extraordinary feats of sight. See entry in
Book One.

lentum shorthand for a post-lentum or any other covered and enclosed carriage of four wheels.
lesquin(s) (noun) honored mercenary regiments and brigades of the obdacar or freebooter (mercenary) class,
wandering the lands or stationed in home cities waiting for the highest-paying master. They are special societies of
soldiers with elaborate initiation ceremonies that emphasize loyalty to the particular landsaire (a lesquin legion).
Much used in the squabbles between cities because they are a way — a loophole — around the stringent recruiting
restrictions of the Accord of Menschen (where numbers within a state's standing army are limited). The use of
lesquins also allows a certain amount of immunity from accountability should it ever be required by the Emperor. —
"So sorry, your Imperial Highness, the lesquins got out of control and we were not able to stop them," or that kind of
thing. Lesquins dress as gaily as lahzars and calendars, though with differences that make them immediately
recognizable, wearing such things as sammosh (big baggy hats) with guirlandes (enormous dyed feathers worn on the
head), plunderhose (baggy pants tied off at the knee), exotic hide proofing such as crocodile (reptile skin), and
favoring exotic weapons, especially combinades. Lesquin legions, or landsaires, originating from nonsignatory
countries (Gottingenin, Wörms, the Lausid States and anywhere north of the Marrow and the Foullands) are
preferred, though their numbers may still be stocked from Old World (meaning "Imperial") populations. They will
often charge their fee in accordance with their reputation. Still, less expensive landsaires have their uses — most
notably affordability. The elite regiments are marked out with fancy mottle accoutrements: ospreys and other
hackles, ailettes, and bonnets to rival a calendar's dandicomb. Champions, known as machismards, are awarded
harness and gear of exceptional manufacture, beyond regular issue, to recognize their prowess and encourage such
ambition among brother fighters. Lesquins make excellent soldiers, rivaled only by a few standing armies or, more
particularly, units within the same. Contests with such as these are fought bitterly to prove, of course, who is best.

Ragtag bands of ill-trained, ill-equipped, ill-led and very cheap mercenary regiments are called foedermen, and are
not considered worthy of the lesquin name. (noun) card game commonly played by serious gamblers between a
dealer (known as the colonel) and any number of wagerers. It is based on matching cards, and who holds what card
determines whether the colonel or wagerers get the pot or ante. It takes its name from the soldiering lesquins, for
some mistakenly believe it was invented by these sell-swords, but it is more likely that the lesquins are responsible
not for its invention but for spreading it about the known world. There are certainly among its most frequent players.
The prentices of Winstermill would be playing it to feel all manly and brave; the lighters on the Wormway would be
playing it because all soldiers the lands over do.

letter-fall that is the apt sequence or “fall,” of the letters as they are in what we would call the alphabet;
alphabetical order.

liaphobe(s) see gretchen(s), gretchen-globe(s)
libermane potive used to prevent the cruor of a monster from clotting too quickly as it is stored in a bruicle.
Useful as this is, it also affects the quality of the blood, thinning it and making the cruorpunxis it is used for pale, less
distinct. Therefore libermane is used only when a teratologist is more than a couple of days' journey from a
punctographist. Another function of libermane is its application on swords, knives and other blades of war to make a
wound flow more than it ought, though by the Accord of Menschen this practice is deemed unacceptable in modern
conflict.

Lictor person in charge of punishment and discipline, the deliverer of the lash, the clapper of irons, the locker of
stocks, pillories and durance doors; the tightener of the noose or the cords of a Catherine wheel. In more extreme
regimes, the Lictor is also the chief torturer.

lighter(s) shortened term for lamplighter.
limes short, universal morning interval designed purely to make certain pediteers get some citrus juice into them.
After the discovery by Callio Catio (reputed — along with Asclipides and others — to be the founder of modern
physics) of the prevention of scurvy and other nutrition-related diseases, military organizations the lands over have
fastidiously ensured their men take their lime or lemon juice (Juice-of-Orange is a more recent advent, reserved for
those who can afford it and not your ordinary foot slogger).

limulight(s) small box-light whose source of effulgence is living bioluminescent mosses and lichens. See mosslight.

linen package wrapped parcel containing one's underclothes.
liripipium hat with a peak that hangs down at the back in a “tail.”
locum usually a physician in training or someone working as assistant to a physic with a view toward attending a
physactery and gaining a full qualification.

long-rifle smooth-bore musket with an extraordinarily long barrel to provide greater accuracy. The name is a
misnomer, for the bore is not in fact “rifled,” but left smooth, though the great length of the barrel does make for very
true shots.

loomblaze powerful repellent that is also part fulminant. Because it both poisons and burns with false-fire, it is
regarded as a very versatile agrise (violent potives; as opposed to palliates — helpful, healthful potive; or obstrutes
— most other potives), useful against both human and monster. The nature of its violence means its use is
recommended only when deadly force is required.

lordia mild restorative that is meant to balance the humours (see Four Humours, the ~ in Book One). Balancing the
humours restores equilibrium to intellect and soul, pith and thew, calming the imbiber and settling agitations to ease.

Its mild efficacy is matched only by its small expense; a cheap pick-me-up that has been said to be the cause of
addiction in some.

lorica also known as a corslet, a proof-steel back-and-breastplate, worn most by troubardiers and the few heavy
equiteer regiments in the Half-Continent. Its front is fairly steeply peaked to allow shots from a firelock to more
easily ricochet. It is a common practice to adhere lour or soe or villeny to the metal or to black it in order to
eliminate or reduce shine.

Lornstone, the ~ also known as the Heptafornix or “seven arches,” a bridge and causeway built as part of the
great project to run a road through the Ichormeer. The causeway that runs east from it was built on the pattern of the
Pettiwiggin and had been intended to carry the road all the way through the Frugelle. The attrition of economies and
a lack of desire meant this ambition was soon abandoned after only a few miles of raised-road were completed. The
first of many small failures that dogged the great work of the laying of the Conduit Vermis.

Lot's Books popular diagrammatic readers written on a whole host of topics — navies, monsters, famous people,
animals, weapons, etc. — and filled with helpful diagrams. Expensive, they are a favorite educational tool for
children among the well-to-do.

lour (noun) velvet that has been treated with gauld, other gaulded cloths include linteum (lint) = cotton; duram =
hemp; buff = leather; ombyx = gauze or other filmy materials; soe = silk; pellis = fur; fustian = hessian; villeny or
lawn = felt. (verb) to frown.

Low Gutter, the ~ in the distant past of Winstermill's history, the southern end of the huge mound upon which it
was erected collapsed with loss of life, the historied rubble on which it was founded failing at last. Rather than
abandon the fortress, as some advised, cooler minds prevailed to have that ruined section of what was once an
enormous open ground shored up and leveled, a stable shelf several score feet lower than the main Mead. Upon this
shelf it became practicable to construct servants' quarters and mills for laboring work as the staff of Winstermill
expanded beyond the simple barracks it once had been. It was during the early repairs that the name the Low Gutter
was coined, for the ruined foundation would fill with the rains and spout water from many cracks and corners like a
roof gutter.

lurcher(s) (noun) also called finegars, the vernacular for those who especially trap monsters, doing their level best
to keep them alive. They are considered worse than poachers and other such slyboots, and often trap on lands
otherwise declared out of their bounds, such as the private lands of a peer. ( noun) derogatory name used to refer to
someone who killed a monster for which another had the Writ of the Course to slay, thus robbing that second gallant
of his head-money.

lurksman, lurksmen sometimes called pathprys, these are trackers and spies, and are often nonleers practiced in
the use of a sthenicon. Given that a sthenicon is made to be used and understood by a leer, it takes a lot for nonleers
to achieve such skill, and once they have mastered it they are never as good as a box-faced laggard. Still, a lurksman
is far better than no sensurist at all.

lurksman-general informal name for the General-Master-of-Palliateers and the commanding officer of the
Palliateer-Major. Palliateers are those soldiers and auxiliaries concerned with sneaking and spying and tracking,
including leers, lurksmen, ambuscadiers, sneaksmen and other clandestine agents.

M
mabrigond one of the constituents of Craumpalin's Exstinker made from the dried and ground buds of the flower
of the same name; a typical inclusion in nullodors, where its own flat smell helps obscure other scents.

maiden-fraught any woman given to a life of combat, including calendars. In a typically patriarchal society,

skolding and more recently becoming a lahzar has been an oft-used path for young women seeking relief and
independence from their fathers, uncles, brothers and the usual societal mores. Lahzars, particularly, occupy an
unusual place in society, outside of it in an ill-defined way: respected, feared, despised and needed. And a woman as
one is regarded as the acme of all things ‘modern’ — and modernity is generally regarded as a bad thing by those of
breeding. "You look very modern," one might say with a sneer.

Maids of Malady, the ~ clave of calendars from Burgundia. Little is known of them in the Empire, for they
direct their activities more to the eastern lands, though any who have had dealings with the Soratchë will have likely
heard of their allies the Maids as well. Indeed the Maids are said to be aspex (see invidists), treating sedorners most
severely, going out of their way to chase down a proven outramorine. They are even more zealous than their allies in
their pursuit of black habilists.

mains last official meal of the day, usually begun at 6 p.m.. Much to Rossamünd's early discomfort, mains is later
in the day than he was used to at the old marine society, and he was terribly sharp-set in the first week as a prenticelighter at Winstermill, as his tummy emptied on habit two whole hours earlier than it would be filled again.

Major-of-House the correct title of a house-major.
Makepeace one of the smaller settlements in the Idlewild sponsored by Brandenbrass. The sister colony of the
mining village Gathercoal, this hopefully named township is the main source of supply and support to the peltrymen
of the Ullwold to the north, and pastoralists of the Swiddenlands or Swide — the narrow hilly stretch of farms to the
south along the northern fells of the Sparrow Downs. It is also home to the cothouse of Makepeace Stile.

manchin(s) thick sleeves of proofed materials, usually voluminous enough to be pulled over other sleeves, then
tied to the body with straps or ribbons. They serve as extra protection for the arms, and are often lined with fleece for
added warmth.

maraude(s) theroscades on a large scale, with an abnormally large collection of monsters in one attack or many
attacks across a range or, most frightening of all, both at once. For reasons not properly understood, winter has
proved to be the more usual time for such things, but they are mercifully less common than might be expected.
Unless they are beasts who naturally pack together, it takes a mighty showing of will to get monsters to behave in
concert. Even so, history both popular and obscure is filled with the hushed tellings of these terrible days and the
Empire is still recovering from the aftermath of the greatest maraudes — those civilization-ruining massings of
nickers great and small.

Maria Diem old Tutin word meaning “Meerday” — the Day of the Sea. For the other days of the week there are
Newwich = Prima Diem, Loonday = Luna Diem, Midwich = Media Diem, Domesday = Festus Deis, Calumnday =
Caelum Dies, and Solemnday = Gravis Diem.

mark (noun) monster-blood tattoo; (verb) to apply a monster-blood tattoo.
marshal-lighter alternative rendering of Lamplighter-Marshal.
massacar(s) common name for a black habilist, especially those loathsome dabblers who make rever-men and
other gudgeons. See habilists in Book One.

Master Come-lately a mildly derogatory name for Rossamünd, given to him first by Lamplighter-Sergeant
Grindrod and quickly adopted by the other prentices.

Master-of-Clerks, the ~ also known as the clerk-master, the rank of Podious Whympre, the youngest son of a
youngest son of a line of glossagraphs (foreign clerks) from Brandenbrass. There is money in the family, but Podious
is not likely to inherit. The parsimonious fellow is an ambitious and shrewd administrator who loves a complete and
thorough system of paperwork. His substantive (actual) rank is the highest non-commissioned clerk in a military
establishment; his brevet (temporary) rank as Comptroller-Master-General puts him equal with the second highest
ranks in Winstermill, though its position as the leader of all bureaucracy makes him the second-in-command. His

appointment to this powerful position, after the original Comptroller-Master-General took sudden leave of his senses
and the manse, was due to the influence of the Imperial Secretary stationed in High Vesting. An old friend of the
family's scrupulous sicus has taken to patronizing Whympre, exerting influence at the political end in the clerkmaster's favor. Ultimately taking his orders from Imperial bureaucrats, the Lamplighter-Marshal, whatever his
personal take, has had to promote as directed. It is very frustrating for a military leader to have his affairs meddled
with from afar.

mathematician(s) bitter rivals of the concometrists (see entry in Book One), trained at an institution known as an
abacus, and more interested in the beauty and function of pure numbers and systems than the functions of society.
Trainees of an abacus are prized for their sharp minds, rapid calculations and other skills of genius and mental
aptitude. Indexers, for example, are those who can organize figures and information in their heads without writing
anything down, then remember it all and retrieve some point or fact for you at will, like thumbing through a file.
Probably the most famous kinds of mathematician are the Imperial Computers, striving up in Clementine, figuring
probabilities and sums that might affect the Empire.

Maudlin said “Moord-lin”; a planet, and one of the brightest lights in the night sky, having a distinct greenish
tinge. See entry in Book One.

mercer public messengers and parcel deliverers with a distinctive red-and-yellow-checked mottle. Usually
employed within the confines of Imperial bureaucracies, they are sometimes sent to roam the lands taking notes,
letters, invitations, packages and advertisements from someone to another and back.

middens meal between breakfast and mains, around the middle of the day; lunch.
milt the depth of one's self; the core of one's soul and convictions, deeper even than the heart.
Mirthlbrook, the ~ sometimes spelled Myrthlbrook; also known as the Mirthbyr or Mirthlstream or just the
Mirthle, the fast-running stream that runs the length of the main valley that is the western Idlewild (otherwise known
as the Placidine). The origin of its name is unclear; some say it is because of the many kinds of myrtle crowding
along great lengths of its bank; yet others hold that it is because of the merry sound of its waters bubbling along its
stony bed.

monster(s) the nonhuman denizens of the Half-Continent. See entry in Book One.
monster-blood tattoo cruorpunxis; see entry in Book One.
monster-making province of the massacars — or monster-makers — its practitioners are either called cadaverists
(working in fabercadavery — making monsters from parts) or theropeusists or threopusists (working in theropsusia
— making monsters by growing them). See habilists in Book One.

mordant(s) scripts that work by corrosion, otherwise known as distinct acids.
moss-light also known as limnulin or limelight, this is a small, pocketable device, a simple biologue consisting of
a small, lidded box holding a clump of naturally phosphorescent mosslike lichens (either funkelmoos or micareen),
set on a thick bed of nutrient to keep it alive. This nutrient bed can be reinvigorated with drops of a liquid similar to
seltzer. The light provided by a limnulin is not bright, but can give you enough to see your way right on a dark, dark
night, and is diffuse enough to not attract immediate attention. The color of the light varies widely: white, yellowish,
green, blue and reddish illumination. The light produced has a distinctive natural glow and discrete focus that keeps
it from being seen by unwanted eyes at oblique angles.

munkler(s) also known as holzkreggers or nimsmen, being the fellows whose dangerous task it is to go into the
deep wild woodlands, seek out, cut down and carry away as much almugwood, black elder and other rare growths
(see sectithere) as they can find. These woods are found mostly in the dark forests of Wörms and the central
Gottskylds (as well as the uninhabitable spaces between Wencleslaus and Ing), and the name comes from the Gott
word for ‘whisper.’ It is given to them because of the silence and care with which they must proceed into the remote

places and the relative quiet they must employ when taking down a tree. This is done using a great array of tackle
and ropes strung from surrounding trees, which prevent the felled logs from crashing noisily. Munklers are therefore
skilled climbers and knot-tiers. Animals are never taken on these expeditions, and the munklers carry out only what
they themselves can bear. This is not much as woodcutting might go, but such a high price can be got for their
precious cargo that four or five back-loads is enough to set a man up for more than a year's living. Consequently,
munklers make their dangerous forays only once or twice a year. One of the characteristic practices of munklers is to
always cover themselves in nullodors so as to attract as little monstrous attention as possible as they extract the rare
timber.

muttony-greasy rich stew of lamb-gristle and goat-meat, cooked all day to make it digestible, its sauce rich and
salty, the best aromatic with a myriad of herbs.

N
Naught Swathe also known as the Blank Swathe or the Dodderbanks, a region of the eastern bank of the Humour,
near its mouth, and the lands farther east, inland to the Tumblesloe Heap. Home to several villages, the most
prominent being Red Scarfe and Sodbury Wicket. Rossamünd actually made his way through the southern end of the
Dodder Swathe during his flight from the Spindle to High Vesting.

Neuroticrith technical or proper name for a wit.
new-carved used to describe a lahzar who had only recently been operated on to become one.
nicker(s) generally any monster. See entry in Book One.
night-clerk an uhrsprechman.
nihillis one of the parts that make up Craumpalin's Exstinker, being a distillation of the odor-absorbing chalks dug
from the mines of the Orpramine and Euclasia on the Verid Litus. The best chalks come from the pits at Caulk
Sinter, Ferdigundis Rex and Calcedonys. It is a common ingredient in nullodors.

nullodor(s) any potive that changes or hides an existing smell. See entry in Book One.
Numps, Numption Orphias highly talented, semiretired seltzerman kept in service at Winstermill by the
goodwill of the current Lamplighter-Marshal. Disowned by his family after the terrible incident of three years ago.

Nuptarium, the ~ also known as the Collocation; lines down in the Low Gutter where married pediteers and
lampsmen live with their wives and even children — though fortress life is not considered best for little ‘uns.
Married men with rank are still expected to spend two or more nights sleeping in the bachelors' lines each week.

nutrified wine usually claret that, along with pear or apple pulp, is mixed with concentrates of oranges, lemons
and limes and other decoctions of healthful herbs to provide a method of keeping folks healthy by duping them with
alcohol.

O
obsequy what we would call a funeral, also known as a funery or inurment. These rites typically include a
declaration of the person's merit and then some traditional farewell given by the mourners. In the Haacobin Empire it

is most commonly thought that when people die they simply stop: a life begins, a life ends. In the cultures about
them and their own past there have been various beliefs about afterlife and some all-creating elemental personage,
but such notions are considered oppressive and outmoded. They would rather leave these ideas to the eekers, pistins
(believers in a god) and other odd fringe-dwellers.

obstacular(s) often billeted alongside the lighters might be a small garrison of suicidally zealous obstaculars: thief
takers and excise-men who make oaths with their own blood to ferret out all lurching, smuggling, banditry and dark
trades in their range.

Ol’ Barny the Old Barn Owl, the affectionate epithet given to the Parracallid, also known as Sagax Glauxës or
Saxo Glauxës, the Sagacious Owl of the Haacobins, the sigil of the Empire, which common pediteers of old held to
look like a barn owl.

Old Gate pensioner, stiff as an ~ Old Gate in Brandenbrass is a hospital for aged pensioned pediteers to spend
what years are left to them in a quasi-military environment, still performing evolutions, though to as easily as they
once did — hence the expression.

Old Lacey the name the lighters of the Paucitine have given to the fleermare — more properly called the
Lacrimaria — that comes in from the Swash. They use this name both as a corruption of its proper designation and
because commonly as it is falling or lifting it looks like a web or “lace” of foggy tendrils.

ossatomist sometimes also called a bone-setter; the proper name for a person whose job is indeed to reset broken
bones, a practice known as ossatomy. Because proofing is so effective in stopping lacerations, the more common
wounds are bruises and breaks, as the body beneath the gaulding absorbs blows. There are no colleges or institutions
that train ossatomists; they rather pass their trade on through prenticing, and yet are still considered higher in value
than surgeons. Ossatomists also perform dentury, that is, many of the functions we might recognize as the work of a
dentist.

outramorine one accused or take by outramour, a monster-lover.
outramour high regard for or love of monsters; the crime of which sedorners are guilty. Technically this is known
as theiragapia (and its perpetrators as theragapins), and is also called sedonition (of course), and sometimes
bewilderment (the state of being dazzled by — and therefore sympathetic to — the wilds).

Owlgrave, the ~ a thick wood at the eastern end of the Ullwold, in which can be found many boneyards —
threwdish places where monsters of the region will take their prey and where they go to die when the weight of the
everlasting war with the everymen weighs too heavy or wounds too deeply. Most animals eschew such places and
they are characterized by the absence of birdsong — but for the hoots of owls and other scavenging birds who dare to
go there at night for the promise of a feast of moldering monster-meat.

ox dray large, long, heavy, flat wagon with 4, 6 or even 8 wheels for the carting of big loads and pulled by a team
of 6, 8 or even 10 oxen. When there is a paucity of these beasts, great trains of 20 or more mules are used instead to
achieve the same hauling strength. In tamer places, dobbins — great draft horses as strong as any ox — are
employed.

P
pagrinine also known as a filzhüt, the soft squarish cap of proofed felt (lawn) worn by troubardiers.
palisade cloth and wire cap favored by women of the southern Patricine and Frestonia.

Palliateer-Major in charge of small groups of leers, lurksmen, sneaksmen, and other erapteteers (those who
creep), with captains to aid in their command. Palliateers tend to be divided into ambuscadiers (sneaking, ambushing
soldiers) and srapteteers (sniffing, ferreting spies and trackers).

palliatrix one who is trained to lie and deceive without giving any hint of mendacity, gaining mastery over
reflexive gestures and nuances of expression — any small tic or twitch or stutter of the eye or voice that could give
away a falsehood. Not a very common class of person and typically used only by less than-savory employers.

pallmain(s) heavy, oiled coat used to keep the wearer dry rather than for warmth. Typically they are proofed,
which adds to their water-resistant qualities as well as their protective ones; among the few items of proofing
vinegaroons will wear in service.

Pandomë one of the calendars of the Right of the Pacific Dove, a pistoleer (or spendonette as she would be called
by her "sisters") of great skill and fiercely devoted to Dolours, even over her loyalty to the Lady Vey. Her name,
given her when she joined the Right, means "of the people, of the house," essentially "woman of the people."

Pannette a purrichin — or calendine sagaar of the Right of the Pacific Dove, young and fairly newly joined to the
Right, being with them not even a year. It is said she was banished from her clave back in Grawthewse for
undisclosed "irregularities" of conduct, though word has filtered through from visiting caladines of other claves that it
involved a series of assignations with a married peer. The august of the Right has not pressed her for clarity, but
rather has welcomed the increase to their numbers regardless of any reservations.

parenthis waiting room in a coach-host or any other establishment requiring such a place. They are so called
because of the Parenthine in Clementine, the great waiting hall where honored and lofty folk tarry before a meeting
with the Emperor.

park-drag very large carriage that can carry up to eight passengers, needing at least a team of six to pull it; it is
more common in cities than the country.

parti-hued multi-colored; mottled with bright hues.
Paucitine, the ~ eastern half or theme of the Idlewild, from the Wight to Haltmire, gaining its name from the
poorness of farming and the harshness of life in general in that region, as much of which is taken up by the Frugelle.

pediteer any kind of foot soldier. See entry in Book One.
peltrymen trappers and fur traders living rough lives; tough and resourceful, these fellows know well how to avoid
monstrous encounters and some even dare to trap the same and sell them to agents in the dark trades, doing so to
supplement their meager earnings.

pen(s) also imaginer or (derogatory) fabulist; what we might think of as an illustrator or commercial artist.
Somewhat confusingly, the term is also used for freelance writers.

peoneer(s) military laborers with particular skills in constructing fortifications from surrounding materials and
sapping, that is, digging trenches near enemy positions and undermining walls.

pernicious threwd the worst kind of threwd, said to drive people mad with fear. It is the kind of threwd that is
said to grip the inland places of the Half-Continent: the Grassmeer and the Witherlends. Some of the momre crafty
monsters are actually able to amplify the effect of the threwd to terrify an individual. The most mighty of the
monsters are said to be able to awe whole armies with such amplification.

Pettiwiggin, the ~ meaning "little worm," the more common name for the Harrowmath Pike. Part of the
Wormway, running from Winstermill in the west to Wellnigh House in the east.

phrantry specifically the collective membership or sisterhood of a clave of calendars.
physician(s) highly respected, these are the main practitioners of physics in the Half-Continent. See entry in Book
One.

physics what we would call medicine. See Book One.
Pile, Laudibus a native of Brandenbrass and telltale to the Master-of-Clerks. From a middle-class family brought
to near ruin by the cheating and falsehood of a viciously unscrupulous peer, Laudibus decided by his tenth birthday
that when he was old enough he would become a falseman and bring that same peer undone. This he did, rescuing
his family though corrupting himself in the process and earning a short stint gaol. Thinking his prospects ruined, Pile
yet managed to work his way into a minor Imperial clerical position — such is the demand for falsemen. There he
was "discovered" by one Podious Whympre — then a senior tally clerk in the Imperial Usury Bureau — who took
him under his wing, anticipating a general upward movement in his own prospects and knowing full well how handy
your own falseman can be. When the promotion and shift to Winstermill arrived for his new master, Pile happily
followed in Whympre's wake.

Pill eminent illustrator of broadsheets and other periodicals known for the firm, confident quality of his lines and
the precise detail he can achieve in a relatively short time.

Pillow, Giddeon native of Doggenbrass, Pillow is a younger son of small-time middle-class merchants who was
taken out of school and sent to the lighters when his parents inherited an old family debt. This had them put in the
sponging house and all the children set to work until the debt was paid. Though Pillow does go on vigil-day trips to
Silvernook, he does not spend much there but sends most of his pay back home. He would much rather continue in
his father's line of work than live a life of danger on the road.

piquet a small collection of ambuscadiers, lurksmen, leers and other sharp-eyed individuals sent to scout or spy and
return with their reports unnoticed.

pirouette card game where the highest hand makes the lowest hand dance a particular dance as dictated by the
cards of the winner. It is a complex game where knowledge of all the many ranks and meanings of cards is essential
if you do not want to find yourself hopping and hopping embarrassingly all night. Each combination of cards or
"route" has a name: "the Kindly Ladies" are any combination of queens and duchesses; the four of brutes is "the
dancing (or hopping) aurang" and so on. Knowing all these names and their combinations is held as proof of your
skill with the game.

pistoleer teratologist who performs services with pistols and other handheld firelocks loaded with various kinds of
skold-shot. They are often skolds who make their own potives to be discharged from the barrel of a pistol, though
many would be considered ledgermains with just enough habilistics to achieve the chemistry they need to make
skold-shot or any other potive that can be discharged. Pistoleers prefer to use hauncets and salinumbus rather than
just a simple pistola, though they might possess one to deal with more mundane threats.

Placidine, the ~ western half of the Idlewild, so named because it is considered the safer (and thus more peaceful)
than the eastern half. The Placidine is regarded by most (especially those who dwell therein) as the true Idlewild, the
only part that really counts or has value. See Idlewild, the.

plaudamentum the proper name for Cathar's Treacle, which is taken by lahzars. See Cathar's Treacle and entry in
Book One.

"playing of strings" also known as "pulling the cords," both meaning using influence, favors, nepotism and
whatever other means at your disposal to achieve an ambition within or through a bureaucracy, political body or
anywhere else really.

pledget(s) absorbent bandages, often made from lint or pullings of cloth and used mostly to staunch flows of
blood, such as might occur in a surgery.

Plod, Punthill prentice in the same course with Rossamünd. A native of Brandenbrass and the youngest of fifteen
children, Plod has joined the Imperial Lighters of the Conduit Vermis to escape his poverty. He will not be missed
by his overtaxed and half-soused mother.

plush elegant finery, clothes of expensive make often finished with flourishes of lace and fur and metallic cloths
and the like. Especially used of uniforms so made; what we might call livery.

po solemn, serious or innocent-looking; also sometimes used to mean unconcerned or indifferent.
poker unflattering name for lamplighters; so given because of the pole-pokes (see fodicar) they carry to light the
lamps with.

poleax(es) not actually an ax, but rather a nasty-looking war hammer upon a long pole. At the end of such a
length of handle the head can achieve a terrible blow and as such they are the preferred tool of troubardiers wanting
to hammer people to stuff inside their gaulded covers.

po’lent shortened form of post-lentum, “po(st)-lent(um),” and a common vernacular term for carriages of that kind.
poll person's head, or the top or “head” of anything.
pollcarry "on-seller" of a skold's potives, unable to make them, but buying them for one zaumabalist (or skold) or
more and reselling them for whatever price the local market will bear. They have a variable reputation, and are often
the only source of potives in some remoter places.

post-and-six or lentum-and-six, simply the name of the carriage and the number of horses in the team pulling it:
in this case, a post-lentum and a six-horse team.

post-lentum(s) among the carriages more commonly used to traverse the highroads and byroads of the HalfContinent, post-lentums deliver mail and taxi people (for a fare) from one post to another. They are manned by a
lenterman or driver, an escort (usually armed and armored) known as a side-armsman or cock robin (if wearing a red
weskit of Imperial Service) or Prussian (if wearing a deep blue weskit of private employment) and one or two
backsteppers — either splasher boys or post runners or amblers — sitting upon the seats at the back of the roof.
When traveling dangerous stretches, another backstepper may join — a quarter-topman possessing a firelock and a
keen gaze — for extra protection The crew is collectively (and confusingly) referred to as lentermen. The delivery
of post in remoter areas is irregular, the lentermen waiting for there to be enough missives and parcels to warrant the
dangerous journey (usually a post-bag over half-full). If possible they also prefer to take passengers along with them,
the extra income making the risk of travel worthy. Po’lent is the common term for these vehicles, an abbreviated
derivation of po(st)-lent(um).

potive(s) any combination of parts (chemicals) for a particular and definable effect. See entry in Book One.
prentice(s), prentice-lighter(s) “prentice” is the name given to any (typically young) person taken on to learn a
skill-set, in the case of this book, those training to be lamplighters. A prentice-lighter's duties will include workings
(hands-on learning), targets (shooting practice), evolutions (marching and drill), readings (very basic reading, writing
and rimitry [arighmetic] lessons from books), refections (meals), impositions (minor punishments), castigations (the
period after mains when punishments are read out to remind the prentices of who needs to be where for doing what.
This is also the term for major punishments, including time in the pillory and flogging — very very rare) and
confinations (when prentices are kept in their cells). The life of prentices is governed by strict routine, and every
moment of their day is taken up with military and practical lessons in fighting and lighting the lamps. Four months
(roughly thirteen weeks) is deemed long enough to turn a blunderer into a lighter, though once the prentices have
been promoted to lampsman 3rd class they are typically billeted to the safer western end of the road till they have
achieved the rank of lampsman 2nd class. Because there are far fewer of them, prentices are treated better than other
military recruits, husbanded as a precious resource and fed well and trained intensively (though briefly) in their tasks.
Given this and that they are better paid (slightly) than your usual pediteer, it is surprising more lads do to sign up for

a life tending the lamps on the highroads.

prentice-watches lantern-watch conducted for prentices, where the platoon of prentices is divided into quartos
and each one is sent out onto the road on set nights to learn the job in the field. The quartos are named after
noteworthy military persons from history or the current regime. When Rossamünd was prenticing he and his fellows
were sectioned into three quartos, or prentice quarters, named as follows: 1st quarto = Q Protogenës (1st PQP), 2nd =
Q Io Harpsicarus (2nd PQIH), 3rd = Q Hesiod Gæta (3rd PQHG — which is Rossamünd's quarto). Each one was sent
out on this roster:

Quarto
Day

1st
Newich

2nd
3rd
1st
Vigil
Loonday Meerday Midwich Domesday

2nd
3rd
Calumnday Solemnday

Each quarto sets out to light the lamps in the late afternoon of the day named for that quarto, staying overnight at
Wellnigh House when they are done. The next morning they wake before dawn, ready themselves and set out at
sunup to “douse” the lanterns, arriving back in Winstermill to rest and ablute before rejoining their comrades for the
usual day of training. These two days either side of a prentice-watch are long for those involved, hence the two or
three days break in between for each quarto. See Appendix 8.

prenticing training and initiating people into a trade.
"present and level" to present your arm is to hold it out in front of you; to level is bring it up and point it in the
general direction of the enemy.

private room Winstermill has a few small chambers it dedicates to the accommodation and intimate meetings of
distinguished guests, found on the second floor of the manse. These are somewhat self-contained, possessing their
own jakes, small conference rooms and a wet area for ablutions. Even so, these rooms are still quite spare as city
standards to — more on par with a provincial wayhouse.

privers long, sturdy tongs used to grip toxic articles, especially such things as skold-shot.
proofener one who supplies proofing but does not manufacture it.
proof-steel metal (usually forged iron and the like) that has been backed with buff or some other sturdy proofed
material. This allows the metal to be thinner and therefore lighter while still offering superior protection. The
wearing of metal proofing of any sort is regarded as flashy or showing away or old-fashioned or all of these in one,
though regardless troubardiers and lesquins typically reserve the right to don proof-steel.

pudding(s) what we would call dessert.
punct puncting to mark someone with a cruorpunxis.
punctographist(s) also called a nadeller (Gott) or marker. A person who is skilled in marking or puncting a
person with a monster-blood tattoo. A punctographist's tools are known as grailles, used for either extracting the
cruor of a monster or for tattooing (puncting) a mark of a person. A punctographist typically views the head and face
of the slain monster in advance of the actual puncting, and makes a design for the tattoo in a book or on some other
paper from what they see or are told.

punt-royale card game where the highest ranked cards are the least desirable. The game revolves around passing
these cards off on each other till all the cards are played or a predecided number of passes (turns) have occurred. The
loser, or knave, is the one with the most high cards; the winner, or free man, is the one with none. More of a
recreational game rather than one for gambling, though inveterate wagerers have found ways to win and lose money
with it.

purgation taming the land and quelling the threwd through force and violence, especially against the monsters

themselves. It is the more immediate way to begin conquest of the wilds, but its effects are only short term, for
monsters will always return to places they consider their home, their original/proper range of wandering. See
Idlewild, the.

Puttinger said “Putt’ing’ger”; lampsman 1st class of Winstermill, once a native of Gottland, being born in
Wittzingerod; how he came to be in the Emperor's Service is a tale he isn't telling. He is the eldest of the three
lampsmen set over the young prentices and probably the friendliest — though only just barely. Struggles to make
himself understood to the lads through his thick Gott accent.

Q
q the symbol for sequins, the middle-value coin denomination in the common currency of the Soutlands. The
average weekly wage for your common working fellows is 8 q, which in turn is about the average hourly rate of hire
for your high-class teratologist — such as Europe, the Branden Rose. See money in Book One.

QGU abbreviated reference to quo gratia.
Q Hesiod Gæta the quarto of prentice-lighters to which Rossamünd belongs. The Q stands for quarto, and Hesiod
Gæta was once Lamplighter-Marshal in charge of the lighters at the time that the Idlewild was founded. The names
of the other prentice quartos are also taken from other noteworthy lighters of old. Io Harpsicarius was the founding
marshal of Winstermill, while Protogenës is probably the most renowned, performing great feats in defense of the
fledgling colonies of the Placidia Solitus.

quabard vestlike proofing for the chest, sometimes referred to in full as "quarter-bard," usually reaching down over
the abdomen. See entry in Book One.

quacksalver doctor or dispensurist, but particularly a bad one or one who passes himself off as a person of physics
without possessing the actual qualifications or skills.

quarto(s) the smallest designation of a group of soldiers. It goes:
quarto = ten men
platoon = 30 men = 3 quartos
company = 100 or more men – 3-4 platoons
battalion = 300-500 men = 3-6 companies
regiment (million) = 1,000-3,000 men = 3-6 battalions
tercion (brigade) = 3,000-12,000 = 3-4 regiments (millions)
legion = 10,000-40,000 men = 3-4 tercions (brigades)
division = 30,000-40,000 men = 2 or more legions
army (marshalsy) = 60,000 or more men = 2 or more divisions

quiet-shoes also called pattens; soft, heelless, pliable shoes with stoutly proofed soles, usually tied on to the foot
with ribands wound way of the leg. Very useful for walking quietly and for activities that require nimbleness, grip
and a near-silent step. Easily the most preferred shoe of calendars and sagaars and even some fulgars.

Quinault northernmost town of the Idlewild, founded by the Sovereign State of Quimperpund with backing from
the peoples of the Maund. Situated on the borders of Sulk, it is a major supplier and trafficker of foodstuffs from the
Sulk to the other colonies immediately to the south.

quo gratia shortened form of the Tutin term "quo gratia ex unicum," "the favor of the peerless," and often invoked
in its abbreviation — QGU, it is the right of a peer to circumvent certain laws — civil or military, though the latter is
a little harder — or the due process of the judicial system, or even nullify a court's ruling, all for personal ends.

Based on an ancient code know as the Wittenrood that existed before even the occupation of the Empire, QGU is
preserved most in the Soutlands, where the Emperor tolerates it to keep the peers there on his side. It is not common
to use this right too frequently, though a peer with enough swagger might carry off even the most outrageous affront
under the cover of QGU. Most, however, are careful and sparing in its use, for its invocation can get you unwelcome
attention from Clementine. Generally if you are to use it, you want to be pretty sure you can get away with it, either
through corrupt practices, the justice of your cause or the power of your lobby in the Imperial Capital.

R
Red Scarfe rural center considered a part of Sulk End, though many of its inhabitants have family and associates
in the Idlewild and so consider themselves as being part of the westernmost end of the Idlewild. It gets its name from
the red bricks that were originally used to make its encircling, sloping walls (a scarfe or scarp).

revenant simply a more formal, educated rendering of rever-man.
rever-man “zombielike” gudgeon, and the most human-looking of the same. See entry in Book One.
Right of the Pacific Dove, the ~ calendar clave found in the historied fastness of Herbroulesse, led by
Syntychë, the Lady Vey. The clave-members are usually called columbines, from the Tutin word "columbarium,"
meaning "dovecote." Originally dwelling in Brandenbrass, the Right — as it is called by its own — was founded
over three hundred years earlier in the time of the Sceptic Dynasty. After too many rivalries with local lords, as well
as with another, better connected clave, they had their charter to exist in that city revoked. Acquiescing meekly, the
Right moved to remoter lands, finding Herbroulesse, where it has endured ever since. Their motto is "Semper
Fidelis" — "always faithful."

rimple a curious-looking hairy-leather purse made from the entire skin of a small rodent, shaved, with a drawstring
at the neck hole, and the skin of one limb sewn back on itself as a loop to six onto a belt. Actually looking like some
bloated rat, a rimple is all the fashion as a coin-bag among the wayfaring classes.

Roughmarch, the ~ the combination of two deep gorges cutting through the southern tip of the Tumblesloe Heap,
worn down into the rock and earth by the action of two ancient, now-dry waterways: one running roughly west, the
other east.

Roughmarch Road, the ~ road that runs through the Roughmarch gorge, running along the serpentine wendings
of the dry streambeds. The middle part of the road is straightest where Imperial peoneers and road-builders blasted
and cut the small spur of rock that separated the two original gorges to allow the road to continue through. The
threwd is never far gone from this place, and the thorny plants that grow along its edges are in need of constant
pruning and lopping. Fatigue parties are sent out at least every two months to do this, thus preventing a monster from
having a place whence to ambush passing traffic.

rouse-master one in charge of a rousing-pit. See hob-rousing.
rousing-pits holes in the ground with stalls or stands or makeshift seats about and in which gudgeons and bogles
are set to fight to the death while the spectators above wager on the outcome. Such pits are usually situated well
away from prying authorities and common paths, kept hidden and secret to all but to those initiated into the local
rousing brotherhood.

S

sabine expensive weave of soft wools from the small kingdom of the same name, found beyond the northern shores
of the Sinus Tintinabuline. It would be held as mythic by southern folk but for the existence of its exquisite wools,
and there are many imitators of their product, some so good only a connoisseur can tell the difference.

sagaar(s) the combatant teratologist dancers who use their nimbleness, the prescribed movements of their chosen
‘dance,’ and therimoirs to defeat the knickers and the bogles. See entry in Book One.

salimumbus meaning ‘salt-shaker’ and also called a salt-gun; a straight-handled pistol made to fire special potives
designed for the purpose. The inside of its barrel is treated with coatings to reduce the corrosive damage done by the
chemistry of its shots.

Sallowstall a cothouse on the Wormway situated in a small dell, by a ford-crossing on the Mirthlbrook.
Sallowstall is thickly surrounded by a small wood of maples and ancient willows, and gains its name from the thicket
of willows — sallows being the local name for willows — that grow about it and along the banks of the Mirthlbrook
on which it is built. It is actually a cot-rent, with a few extra, cramped rooms where non-lampsmen can stay for
modest board.

salpert(s) small, fragile sacks of cloth that hold potives, especially those that need to burst when they are thrown
and hit something. A fair amount of care must be taken when handling them, and the recommended method for
carting them is inside some kind of padded box such as a stoup or digital.

salt-bag(s) simple name for a salumanticum, and so called because it is designed to hold the parts or ‘salts’ of a
skold or other habilist or parts-dealer.

salt-horse a useless person, taken from the idea of a horse that is so old it is no longer good for anything but being
turned into dreid, heavily salted meat.

salumanticum (Tutin, meaning ‘salt-bag’) also known as a salt-bag, usually a satchel with various pockets, flaps
and slots for holding potives in all their varied forms. The arrangement of a salumanticum should facilitate easy
access to the right chemical at the right time, and skolds will know and recall the inside of their salt-bags better than
their own birthdays.

Scale of Might, the ~ originally an anecdotal reckoning of the number of everymen it takes to best an ünterman,
it has since become extensively codified by Imperial Statisticians, but simply put it is deemed possible for three
ordinary men armed in the ordinary manner to see off one garden-variety bogle, and for about five to handle your
more common nicker. Add potives or teratologists to the group and this number fluctuates significantly —
depending on the quality of the potive or skill and type of monster-slayer.

scarlet powder what we would think of as washing detergent, bright red flakes of crystalline surfactant that lose
their color as they form suds in water. Seeing them for the first time you might expect the water in which they are
placed to turn red too, but it remains clear.

scourge(s) skold who specializes in the use of the most potent scripts known. See entry in Book One.
scratch-bob short, powdered wig with dainty curls at the sides and a short tail of hair hanging at the back. Usually
referring to those of cheap manufacture, but a common term for all such items of apparel.

script(s) potives or ‘recipes’ for their making. See entry in Book One.
scrubber(s) very large tubs made from the halves of old brewing butts and used as washing basins to clean dishes
or clothes or any other thing that needs a lot of room for a good scrubbing.

Sebastipole, Mister Lamplighter's Agent of Winstermill and telltale to the Lamplighter-Marshal. See entry in
Book One.

sectifactor(s) transmogrifying surgeons; that is, those people who conduct the surgeries that make a person into a
lahzar.

sectithere said “sek’tih’theer,” kind of therimoir; knives made by a profoundly ancient method, used for the
effective cutting of monsters, who are otherwise hard to harm with more mundane blades. They were once the
standard weapon of the heldins — the mighty folk of renown from obscure history — and the weapons of these nearmythical folk are prized relics today, as the quality of manufacture cannot even be approached currently. In more
recent times sectitheres are the tools of sagaars and therlanes (‘monster-butchers’ from the Tutin ‘therilanius’ and
some punctographists. They are very hard to make, which means they are prohibitively expensive, and as such, very
uncommon. The best kind, of course, are the relics. Some sectitheres come in the form of scissors. The blades are
made of spiegeleisen (also vitrine or festverglas): a highly refined, almost glasslike ceramic containing powerful
mordants, expungeants and pestilents such as gringollsis. This is applied over metal, or allowed to soak into wood
which is then fired many times till it is tempered-steel hard. Different woods give different results: the best woods
for the strongest, most potent blades are made form now near-mythical almugwood or exceptionally rare black elder.
Wood so treated is known as glanzend (Gott for ‘gift-glass’) or giftwood.

Secunda Loca the ‘bottom half’ of the Haacobin Empire, encompassing the lands south-southwest of Tuscanin
and Catalain, down to and including the Lent, reaching west as far as to the Patter Moil and east to the shores of the
Ichormeer. The ‘top half’ is the Prester Regnum, and includes the Seat and the Verid Litus.

seigh the local Sulk and Idlewild name for the more fortified high-houses built in wilder places.
Sellry, wine-of ~ constituent of Craumpalin's Exstinker, a fairly common decoction made from the juices of
several common plants that, when put together, have the qualities required by a wide of fluid potives. Mildly
poisonous, it is most frequently used as a base for repellents, though it is seldom seen in nullodors.

seltzer, seltzer water salts-infused ‘waters’ used to cause bloom to give off light. Depending on the origin of the
very first bloom from which your stock was raised, the constituency of your seltzer will need to vary to allow for the
different marine environments from which each kind of bloom was once retrieved. This knowledge tends to be
possessed only by seltzermen, the suppliers of bright-limns, and some skolds, who can tell what breed of bloom they
might have before them and what mix of seltzer to nourish it in. Generally the composition of seltzer water is:
22 parts brine
5 parts chordic vinegar
3 parts wine-dilute penthil salts
2 parts spirit-of-cadmia
1½ parts bluesalts
Some seltzermen might also include varying parts of ethulate, of which there are different varieties for the particular
breeds of bloom.

seltzer lamp larger version of a seltzer lantern, though the terms are interchangeable.
seltzer lantern any lamp that uses bloom-and-seltzer to give light, but most particularly a portable light of larger
size than a bright-limn.

seltzerman, seltzermen tradesmen responsible for the maintenance of all types of limulights. Their main role is
to make and change the seltzer water used in the same. Among lamplighters, seltzermen have the duty of going out
in the day to any lamp reported by the lantern-watch (in ledgers set aside for the purpose) as needing attention and
performing the necessary repair. This can be anything from adding new seltzer, to adding new bloom, to replacing a
broken pane or replacing the whole lantern bell. See seltzer, seltzer water.

Senior Service the navy — a name it gives itself; see entry in Book One.

senior-sister the name clave members use among themselves to refer to their august, being the highest active
‘rank’ among them. Carlins are the revered ‘retirees’ who often no longer actively serve but live lives of quiet
contemplation or — if they are peeresses — return to the glamour of their former lives as wise old dames.

Sequecious pronounced “seh’kwee’shuss” enormous, easygoing and almost unquenchably jovial, he is a native of
the independent realm of Sebastian, a direct western neighbor of the Seat, the heartland of the Empire. A war over
the fertile lands of the downs of the Agrigentum and the plateau of the Stipula has been waxing and waning between
Sebastian and the Haacobins (and the Sceptics before them) for centuries. Sequecious was a camp cook for an
eminent Sebastian officer and was captured when the baggage train of that officer's regiment was ambushed and
ransacked by Imperial ambuscadiers. Spending time first in a war prison, he was processed and set out to serve as a
soldier slave — as with so many of the Haacobins' prisoners of war — on the Empire's more southerly borders,
despite his size. This found him as the cook for the lighters of Wormstool, as remote a post as you could want for.
The good dealings he has in the hands of the lighters gives him hope for a better life as a citizen of the Empire, as
does the promise of actual pay he is due should he become a native of the Haacobin domains.

sequestery, sequesteries places of quiet and contemplation well within the protecting walls of a calanserie,
originally established to provide well-to-do women with a refuge to which to retreat from undue attention or
unpeaceful lives. Accommodated in their own apartments, these anchoresses (hermit women) are granted the rights
of their degree and live in familiar worldly comfort. They are the great benefactresses of the calendars the world over
and with their support sequesteries are able to take in battered wives, destitute widows, good-day gala-girls and other
ladies of poor repute fleeing their handlers and seeking a better life. They also seek social justice for women as a sex
in general.

sergeant(s) second highest rank of non-commissioned officer, below master but above under-sergeant, involved in
the training, evolving and supervision of the lives of their charges. A good sergeant will play ‘mother’ to a
lieutenant's or captain's ‘father’, tending to the welfare of his subordinates.

sergeant-lighter alternative to Lamplighter-Sergeant, a slightly less formal way of addressing one of that rank and
normally allowed only to those of equal or higher rank.

shabraque(s) proofed coverings for horses, commonly made of panels of buff (gauld-leather), fixed together by
rivets or points (reinforced ties) or both, flexible yet solid. Every time a horse goes out with its shabraque, the
proofing is smeared or splashed with a nullodor, either deadening the horsy odor or transmuting it to smell like some
other less tasty creature. Over all this may be hung a couvrette, a colorful, sturdy blanket in your chosen mottle and
even marked with sigils, a purely decorative feature and the kind of excess insisted upon only by the conspicuously
wealthy.
¨ chaffe or equiperson: a mask covering poll, forelock and forehead, down to the nostril and over the cheeks with
holes for the eyes. Not often used, as it limits a horse's vision.
¨

crinarde: covers mane, neck and often hangs over the points of the shoulders as well.

¨

petraile: covers withers, shoulder, chest and foreparts of ribs down to the knee.

¨ Crouppere: covers back, loin, flank, croup, thigh and buttock, down to the hock, and typically leaving the tail
free.

sheer crane or winch used to lift loads up and lower them down.
showing away boasting or showing off.
siccustrumn any script used to staunch a flow of blood from a wound. This is achieved by pastes, fast-setting
liquids and powders. The better siccustrumn will not only stop a flow quickly, but will act like sutures and keep the
wound from opening and bleeding again. Best results are achieved by a siccustrumn combined with bandages.

signifer(s) the distinct parts of a scent or other trail that aid leers or lurksmen in their work. One of the more
remarkable applications of a signifer is a group of potives known as anavoids, which leers use to mark someone or
something they want to trail, following the distinct scent wherever it may lead. The best anavoids will last for weeks
even in water and are hard to detect by fellow leers and other "box-wearers," seeming more like a natural smell to all
but the person who used it. It has been known for talented and well set-up leers to follow an anavoided trail even
over waters from one harbor to another.

sillabub honey-sweetened milk mixed with either strong wine or, in a Skyldic twist, with vinegar — a taste for the
dead of mouth and strong of stomach.

Silvernook miners' town on the northern edge of the Brindleshaws. See entry in Book One.
Sinster the best place to go to be made into a lahzar. See entry in Book One.
Sinus Tintinabuline called the Sin Tin for short, and meaning the Bay of Bells, it is the great body of water to the
northeast of the Half-Continent, its western shores home to the ports of the Turkemen, its east coast hiding the piratekings of the Brigandine States. The Sin Tin gets its name from the many, many buoys and markers with their
warning-bells that have been moored by the myriad of submerged hazards for as long as history records. These
buoys and markers with their warning-bells have been moored by the myriad of submerged hazards for as long as
history records. These buoys are freely maintained by all who use the waters of the Bay; even the pirate-kings play
ruses with them only very occasionally, otherwise doing their part to tend the ancient warning system.

sis edisserum Tutin term, loosely meaning “please explain,” this is an order from a superior (usually the Emperor)
to appear before him and a panel of peers forthwith, to offer reasons, excuses, testimony and whatever else might be
required to elucidate upon whatever demands clarity. A sis edisserum is normally seen as a portent of Imperial ire, a
sign that the person or people so summoned are in it deep and must work hard to restore the Emperor's confidence. A
sis edisserum is a ‘black mark’ against your name, and very troublesome to remove.

Skillions, the ~ south-eastern corner of the Low Gutter in the fortress of Winstermill. It gains its somewhat
derogatory name from the many small, wood-built single-story sheds, warehouses and work-stalls found there. These
are a recent addition to this part of the Gutter, previously being the site of a stately old building designed for multiple
uses, including the growing of bloom and the making and storing of all lanterns. This reputedly burned down in
mysterious circumstances two generations ago, outside of any current occupant's memory.

skilly gruel or broth made from scrap meat and leftovers from the previous evening's mains.
skittle-alley what we would think of as a "fun-parlor," where folks pay to play at skittles (obviously), hoop-a-ring,
bowlers (essentially carpet bowls) and pegstops (a game that involves using batons known as pegs to knock your
opponent's pegs down and get a ball into their ‘goal’). The best skittle-alleys also possess billiard tables.

skolding practices and arts of a skold, to work as a skold or to got out hunting monsters with potives. See skold(s)
in Book One.

skold-shot leaden balls fired from either musket or pistol, and treated with various concoctions of powerful
venificants known as gringollsis, particularly devised for the destruction of monsters. These potives are corrosive,
damaging the barrels of the firelocks from which they are fired and eating gradually, yet steadily, away at the metal
of the ball itself. Left long enough, a skold-shot ball will dissolve completely away. Very effective against most
nickers and bogles, some of the best gringollsis actually poison a monster to the degree that it becomes vulnerable to
more mundane weapons.

Skyldic coming from or of the Skylds. In modern parlance, it is used in reference to the people of Wörms or
Frissia.

slot and drag a slot is a trail of smells and a drag is a trail of prints and other visible signifers of passing. These
two trails are much more acute to a leer's augmented senses.

slug(s) truly insulting invective against profound dim-wittedness and tardiness.
Smellgrove, Eugus wastrel from Brandenbrass and fellow prentice with Rossamünd who loves his sleep.
Smellgrove started out promisingly as a journeyman rat-catcher before being enticed by the romance of Imperial
Service and the immediate glory of a whole Imperial billion.

Snooks, the culinaire of the Winstermill kitchens, who rules her boiling, bubbling, savory domain from the head
of a long scarred bench — a scale and weights always handy — attended on either side by a row of hanging carcasses
glistening in the heat — mutton, bully beef, coney, pullet, venison for the officers. She reads from recipes and writes
lists of comestibles required while kitchen hands chop and carve before her and the harried bustle spins about her.
She rarely moves; certainly she never lifts a limb to help her henpecked staff, tyrannizing all with her wheezing,
penetrating voice. A near-mythic fear of her makes pots-and-pans an excellent punishment for defaulting prentices.

snuftkin what we might call a muff, a "tube" of fur worn over the hands, wrists and lower arms, for the warming of
the same.

sobersides one who does not drink or get drunk.
soe gaulded silk; already a strong material, silk made into soe is an expensive but highly sought material for
proofing. See lour.

Soratchë said “Saw’rat’kee”; a small but widely spread and well-known calendar clave consisting almost entirely
of caladines, those wandering loner calendars. The Soratchë's stated mission is not so much to fend for the poor and
helpless, but to eradicate the dark trades, especially the abominable practices of the massacars. Strangely, they have
not been granted an Imperial Prerogative (an official commission from the Emperor). Notwithstanding, they are
infamous for the vigor and violence with which they pursue their self-appointed mandate.

sot-headed drunk or acting as if you are drunk; to be slow-witted and stupid.
soutaine long coat with dead straight hems reaching to the knees or even ankles. A foreign style imported from
Heilgoland and worn by those seeking to look serious and unaffected by fashion.

Soutlands, the ~ the large southern part of the Haacobin Empire, requiring two secondary capitals — the alternats
— to govern properly and keep under the Imperial thumb. See entry in Book One.

sovereign lime thickened lime juice mixed with lemon juice and other fortifying traces. Often mixed with
cheaper alcohols to add flavor and encourage people to ingest some kind of antiscorbutic.

spangled whelp-hound(s) smaller kind of tykehound but still big as dogs go, white with black spots on the rump
and flanks and black points. Probably one of the more people-friendly of the tykehound family, and very similar to
our own Dalmatians, yet a little larger and bulkier.

Sparrow Downs, the ~ range of hills between Small and the Idlewild that acts as a boundary between the two.
It is the reputed home of the Duke of Sparrows, an urchin-lord said to lurk and hide within. There are no official
reports of a sighting of this mythical monster, and many doubt the truth of the tale. The deeps of the forest (the
Nigflutenwald — "the Wood of Little Wings") are held to be a tykewood — a woodland haunted by monsters,
impenetrably threwdish and thickly grown. Those few peltrymen who dare to venture there report skulking threats
and an inordinate number of sparrows and other small fowl.

Sparrows, the Duke of ~ See Duke of Sparrows.
spatterdash(es) also known as spats — which are usually a shorter version of the same — these are leather-andbuckle coverings for the shins and reaching over the top of the foot. Often proofed, they provide excellent protection

for the lower leg.

spendonette the term used among calendars for a pistoleer.
spittende(s) a kind of fend, spittendes are very long pikes used especially to fend away monsters and sometimes
large game, with barbed points and strong flukes to prevent a skewered beastie from pushing down the pole and
harming the wielder. Also known as durckshlägen.

splasher, splasher boy most junior member of the lentermen crew, sitting at the back of the carriage ready to
open doors, haul luggage, run messages, carry the post when necessary and otherwise serve the needs of the
passengers, the driver and his side-armsman. It is a dangerous job, but a good one for a lad of between twelve and
eighteen, paying pretty well, near as much as the prentices of Winstermill earn in a year, and without quite the same
constrictions on their lives. When a carriage is in port and the spasher's chores are done his time is his own.

Splinteazle, Seltzerman 2nd Class ~ bosun to House Major Grystle when he was a ram captain, following him
from vessel to vessel and so loyal he went with the man when he was ejected from the navy. As the best fit for his
previous skills he has taken up the role of seltzerman, and though in the ranks of Winstermill he no longer has quite
the same authority, he is known as the old servant of the house-major's and is respected accordingly.

sprither said “sprih-there,” with a short i; the common name for the tubelike needle used to extract ichor (monster
blood) from a slain monster; also known as a bludspritz, its technical name being a cruorclyst. It comprises a long,
thick, needle-pointed, steel tube known as a clystron; a round pewter or tin receptacle known as a curbit is fixed to
the clystron's blunt end. Usually, a preserved gut tube — the intestine — is attached to the other side of the curbit,
upon which the user draws with the mouth, sucking the ichor out of the monster and into the curbit. The more
advanced cruorclysts will have a small preserved bladder instead of the intestine, which is squeezed rapidly to
achieve the same outcome. Ichor, once taken out of the monster, is known as cruor — “spilled blood.” If the curbit
becomes full, the cruor is siphoned into a bruicle. See graille(s).

spurn(s) lahzar or other teratologist who faithfully serves one master or organization. The word is used more
generally to mean someone acting as a personal bodyguard to an individual, the non-teratologist kind sometimes
known as harnessgarde.

Squarmis a costerman who dares the long stretch of the Frugal Way (see entry on the Wormway) to make
occasional deliveries to Haltmire with an old boneshaker of a cart harnessed to a crotchety she-mule, Assanina, hiring
out his services as a kind of wayfaring porter; a native of Brandenbrass, come to the Idlewild to escape some
unpleasant business back home.

"Stand While You Can" rousing military tune with an up-tempo beat despite the grim turn of its content,
showing typical bravado in the face of a violent end. Sung by soldiers throughout the Haacobin Empire, it goes
something like this:

Though foeman press hard, lads
The foemen press hard;
Fight for Ol’ Barny and
Stand while you can.
Stand while you can, lads,
Stand while you can:
With a shout of “Ol’ Barny!”
Stand while you can
Don’t tarry o’er death, lads
Don't tarry o’er death;
Just put your thew forward, and
Stand while you can.

Stand while you can, lads,
Stand while you can:
For the Glory of Ol’ Barny,
Stand while you can.
And so on like that for a whole twenty verses. Its history is obscure, thought the tune is of some antiquity and was
around in other songs well before these words were put to it.

Stander Lates, the ~ Brandenard rendering of Stendrlaeti (“shores of fiendish howling”), the Hagenard name for
the southwestern coast of the Hagenlands, where Ingébargë is said to dwell, devising her wicked brews and waiting
for sailors to eat.

sthenicon these sensory-enhancing biologues are worn by nonleers as well; such folk are called lurksmen. For
both lurksmen and leers the sensation of removing a sthenicon is, for a very brief moment, powerfully disorienting as
the wearer's senses adjust back to normal input: the world seems dull and colorless, sounds oddly muted, the air too
still and bland. This confusion is properly known as accosmia or more commonly as the dulldrins or dimmings. In a
few this can continue on for several days, characterized by the squints, — or strabismic droop — with squinting eyes
and disorientation. The squints is almost guaranteed if you wear a sthenicon for more than a week without respite.

stingo(s) a common term for pints of beer.
storm-bird(s) cuckoo-shrikes, whose appearance is said to precede and therefore announce the arrival of rain,
especially heavy, storming rains.

stouche (noun) a fight, a battle. (verb) to fight.
stoup also called a fistulum, a cylindrical case of (usually) leather-covered wood or just layers of stiffened leathers,
in which scripts are carried for easy access. The interior of a stoup is well padded and so arranged with removable
platelike layers that allow the most needful potives to be got to first, with others arranged by priority beneath. Most
stoups have about 4 or 5 layers, but some are double-ended and can be up to 12 layers long. See Appendix 7.

stovepipe hat vernacular for a copstain or capstin, a tall cylindrical hat with a flat crown and a somewhat narrow
brim. Some varieties are a little more conical.

strig(s) originally the wild heldin fighting women of the Phlegms and then the Attics during the Heldinsage. The
term is used now to refer to any combative female, especially a teratologist. Such women are also known as
beldames. See calendar(s)

stuff (noun) clumps of thread or frayings from rope or cloth. (noun) synonym for bloom. (noun) flesh — though
this is not a common use except in the phrase “stuff and bits.”

“stuff and bits” flesh and bones.
sturdy rough(s) hired muscle, as they say; your ‘heavies’ used to do dirty work and intimidate opponents.
Sulk End south-westernmost part of Sulk of which the Harrowmath is considered a part. See entry in Book One.
Sundergird the Half-Continent, including all the lands outside the Haacobin Empire. Escatoris, the Gottskylds, the
Herelands, the Netherlands and beyond, and the southern reaches of the Witherlends.

surgeon(s) considered the lesser counterpart of physicians. See entry in Book One.
swab (noun) small child (verb) the action of washing a floor with a mop, which is also called a swab.

swaggerer knave or hack or other hired tough; those who put themselves forward as monster-hunters or spurns; a
mercenary.

Swash, the ~ the great bay east of Needle Greening, south of the Frugelle and northwest of Flint, the source of
thick fleermares that are blown inland by strong southerlies to saturate and water the parched Frugelle.

Swill, Honorius Ludius Grotius named after an empress-dowager of old, Honoria Ludia Grotinia — said to be
a revered distant relative of Swill's line — Grotius is the young and gifted surgeon and physician's ward at
Winstermill, gaining the position through the influence of the Master-of-Clerks. A true Imperial subject, being born
and raised in the Considine, his original poverty did not prevent him setting up shop as a talented carver. He soon got
the attention of the surgeons of Sinster and became an articled man there under the tutelage of Flaccus Fusander, a
sectifactor of great and irregular vision. There is a strange, suspicious cloud over Swill's departure from Sinster, a
departure he says was due to the near-violent jealousies of his rivals. A voracious reader with a large personal
library, Swill is ambitious for knowledge — the more obscure the better — and with this the power it might bring.

Syntychë see Vey, the Lady; forename of the august of the Right of the Pacific Dove, and Threnody's mother. A
peer of middling rank, she possesses the hereditary title of marchess and, like most peers, claims a blood link to
Dido's race. It is said she was transmogrified when in her twenties, though none beyond the intimacy of the
Dovecote have ever seen her perform a lahzarine act, and her true nature remains a mystery.

T
tally-clerk person responsible for counting and recording the comings and goings through whichever door, gate or
other portal he or she is assigned to watch. The use of such a function in a place like Winstermill is to regulate trade,
traffic and even emigration, and for awareness of who and what is within the manse. They are assisted greatly in
their duties by cursors.

tandem, tandem chair finely carved, two- or three-seater cushioned seat; what we might call a chaise lounge.
telltale(s) falsemen retained by one of office or status to inform their employers of the veracity of others'
statements or actions, to signal if fellow interlocutors are lying or dissembling or masking the truth in any other way.
If they could afford to, most people of any significance would employ telltales, but there simply are not enough
falsemen to fill so many vacancies. This means that a leer can earn a truly handsome living as a telltale, many
commonly charging a premium for their service at fees usually beyond all but the very well off, or serving with
promises for advancement and personal advantage. Then there are those honorable few who do it simply because it
is their job and responsibility. Despite this rarity, many of the prominent work hard to nullify the advantage a telltale
will give, either by employing their own falseman, or having a palliatrix (a highly trained liar — even rarer than a
falseman) attend in their stead.

tempestine military term for a wit, gained from the notion that they cause a tempest within the minds of the
enemies.

teratologist(s) monster-hunter. In truth there are not a great number of teratologists in the Half-Continent, and
those who are there are stretched thin and typically prefer the higher financial recompense of knaving themselves to
the poor pay received in direct Imperial Service. This is especially true of lahzars, who may well have a large debt to
service, incurred to pay for their original transmogrification. Consequently it is only a few teratologists ever feel
community-hearted enough to work permanently in the government's pay at fortresses, manses and other outposts on
the edges of civilization — and when one dies he or she is very hard to replace. See entry in Book One.

test place where skolds, dispensurists or other habilists do their makings, their brewings and combinations of parts.
What we might term a ‘laboratory.’ Consequently, to brew or otherwise make a potive is to testtelate.

test-barrow or chymistarium or testtle; a wheelbarrow-like device, a sizable oblong box striated with hinges and
doors, drawers and locks, that folds open to reveal many compartments and a small yet fully functioning and very
portable test. This includes a small but remarkably well-appointed portable chymistarium (what we might think of as
a chemistry set) that can include a little stone-lined stove-plate, kept hot even when on the move, providing the clean
puffs of smoke from its chimney. Test-barrows are ancient tools, more basic versions used first by the rubezhals of
old and refined over the centuries. Expensive items, their possession proves the affluence and (assumedly) the
successful skill of its possessor.

thaumateer(s) term for a teratologist in military service; taken from the Attic word for ‘a wonder’ or ‘a marvel.’
As may be expected, the various kinds of teratologist are given their own military designation, such as tempestines
for fulgars, torsadines for wits, bombastines for scourges, avertines for skolds and so on.

theiromisia also known as theiraspexthis, apexthia or, most commonly, invidition: the implacable hatred of
monsters. The opposite of outramour, which is the love of monsters, as an invidist or execrat is the opposite of a
sedorner (see sedorner in Book One). See invidist(s).

theme(s) military districts that are given into the charge of a general or even a marshal — who may even be in
charge of a multiplicity of them. All matters military or to do with the defense of the people are under the control of
the marshal or general. There are two kinds of Static themes — under the control of a state, and Imperial themes,
established by Clementine and not necessarily conforming to sociopolitical boundaries established by the states.
Where Static themes and Imperial themes overlap there can be a great deal of wrangling and collision of jurisdictions.

therimoir(s) prounounced “there’ih’moyr” (Attic, literally, “monster-fate”, also tierschlächt (Gott); weapon
designed or fitted to slay monsters. The most famous and useful of these are the ancient devices, many of which have
been lost in the many rises and falls of civilization.

therlane(s) literally, “monster-butchers,” typically members of the dark trades who, by experience, are usually able
to make a common sense of the varying anatomies of dead monsters and cut them up with sectitheres for the various
uses for which each part will be employed. Those who use such parts are utterly reliant on these monster-carvers,
and skilled therlanes can command high prices for their expertly dissected bogle-bits.

theroid(s) a more technical term for a monster.
theroscade(s) quite simply, an attack by monsters, particularly an ambush, but the term is used to mean any
assault by üntermen.

Theuda, Fadus young lamplighter serving at Wormstool, born and raised in the Considine. His father is a
midlevel bureaucrat in the Imperial Service. Theudas could not ber the idea of desk life and fled his home; after
many adventures he found the active simple life he desired with the lamplighters of the Wormway. An eager fellow
who, through persistence and the excellence of his brief service record, gained a billet out on the “ignoble end of the
road.”

thill(s) shafts on a cart or carriage onto which a horse or other such animal for pulling the vehicle is harnessed.
Threnody of Herbroulesse, Marchess-in-waiting, the Lady ~ only child and daughter to the Lady Vey,
conceived outside of the banns of any intended marriage, simply for the purpose of producing an heir. She is a selfdetermined girl, stubborn and quick-witted, and even quicker tempered, sent to Sinster by her mother on the advent of
her thirteenth birthday to be transmogrified into a lahzarine wit. Consequently, when Rossamünd was still at Madam
Opera's despairing of his chance at getting work, Threnody was under the knives of Spedillo and Sculapias, said to be
among the best surgeons to have ever held a catlin. Dolours and others of the clave advised the Lady Vey to wait, but
she would not, determined to have her daughter as a powerful wit, well learned in antics by the time she was old
enough to begin to share the lead. Threnody has ideas of her own which (of course) do not always correlate to her
mother's ambitions for her. The tension between them is continual, often emotionally violent, to the point that
Threnody's request to become a lamplighter was granted her, if only to give the Syntychë and the columbines of
Columbris a rest from all the agonies of mother-daughter angst. One of the ‘joys’ of Threnody's new state is the

endless imbibing of the necessary chemistry to keep her new organs in check.
Threnody's Alembant Schedule

Loonday

Morning
plaudamentum, Iambic Ichor,
Nephushe
plaudamentum, Iambic Ichor

Meerday

plaudamentum, Iambic Ichor

Midwich
Domesday

plaudamentum, Iambic Ichor
plaudementum, Iambic Ichor

Calumnday

plaudamentum, Iambic Ichor

Cordial of
Sammany
Friscan's
Wead
nil
Friscan's
Wead
nil

Solemnday

plaudamentum, Iambic Ichor,
Friscan's wead

Friscan's
wead

Newich

Noon
nil

Night
plaudamentum,
Friscan's wead
plaudamentum
plaudamentum
plaudamentum
plaudamentum
plaudamentum,
Cordial of
Sammany
plaudamentum

threwd at its mildest, the haunted feeling of watchfulness that can be felt in wilder, less populated places. See
entry in Book One. See also pernicious threwd.

thrice-blighted emphatic curse meaning that someone is truly wicked, useless and unwelcome.
thrombis healing script of the siccustrumn group related to a larger, tasty and oddly threwdish fungus known as
austerpill, thrumcops are a mushroom with a deep brown pileus spotted with swollen off-white circular patches. The
essence of thrumcops can be used in rudimentary repellents, giving rise to the idea that eating them on their own will
cause this essence to seep through your pores and make you less appetizing to a monster.

tinker sometimes mistakenly called a trifler (seller of cheap cutlery and other pewter and tinware), a tinker is a
mender of metal items not requiring a forge to fix. One of the wayfarers that go ‘huc illuc’ about the lands to find
work, though Winstermill employs a whole bunch of the fellows to look after their myriad of small metal-working
needs.

toscanelle any lovely rich red wine coming from the Tuscanin region, actually named after the stream that runs
through that country.

tow rough fabric made from hemp fibers or from jute — a somewhat finer kind of hessian or burlap.
tractor(s) also called feralados or feraloderoes; handlers of animals and beasts of war whose task it is to feed and
clean their charges and make intractable creatures eager to do their master's bidding.

transmogripher(s) surgeon who specializes in the making of lahzars. See lahzars in Book One.
troubardier(s) heavily armored pediteers trained to fight at hand strokes with a variety of hand arms, including
poleaxes, fends, huge swords known as claughs and spadrooms, and other exotic tools. See entry in Book One.

trunk-road(s) roads made by the need for trade and the easy passage of goods.
Tumblesloe Cot one of the primary duties of the lighters here is to take part in the fatigue parties that venture
regularly into the Roughmarch and clear it of monster-harboring vegetation.

Tumblesloes, the ~, Tumblesloe Heap, the ~ Known by the Plutarch Tutins of old as the Arides, for they
were ancient and withered even then; the north-south running range of hills to the east of Winstermill and the

Harrowmath. Their tops, constantly buffeted by strong winds and covered with only a thin soil, support no
vegetation other than mean, stunted stubble. Their low places, however, are choked with dense knots of brambly
plants, sloe, briar and blackberry. Among the oldest hills in the Soutlands, they are known as the ‘heap’ for their
tumbledown appearance and the great cracklike gorges that cross them, the evidence of some tectonic violence eons
before.

Tutin language spoken by the inhabitants of Clementine and the lands about. (It is based loosely — or not so, at
times — on Latin, and to those troubled or offended by this, the author might dare to say: excusationes offero propter
licentiam quam cum hac pulchra lingua in libello meo cepi. Habete eam artificiosam libertatem et. obsecro, mihi
ignoscite).

Tutins the ruling race of the Haacobin Empire, descendants of Dido and her people, speakers of the language of the
same name; also called the Plutarchs (actually their ancient forbears); a refined people of great capacity who once,
under Dido's rule, conquered the regions now known as the Soutlands before their decline. For a time they seemed to
vanish entirely from the southern parts of the Half-Continent, abandoning their allies and dependents to the ravages
of their foes. It was only several hundred years later that they reappeared to rewin lands lost, a lesser people — a
shadow of their mighty forebears — but still strong enough to conquer.

twelve of the best twelve lashes of the straight-whip, or worse yet the three-o’-tail bob.
twin keep(s) bastions or other small forts built side by side, one to support the other. Some are joined by bridges
and covered galleries, others by tunnels, and still others are separate from each other. The most common use of twin
keeps is to straddle a roadway, with a tollgate hung between them for duties to be collected from travelers.

Twörp, Trememdus said ‘twerp’; a rather fat young man whose now-dead parents were exiles from Gothia.
Found wandering and starving by a cruel cantebank man, he was fed and set to work by this fellow as a pan-handler
and mute beggar (for he could not speak a word of Brandenard beyond ‘yes’ and ‘thank you’). Providence stepped in
when, while passing through Winstermill, the Lamplighter-Marshal saw the small abused wastrel and bought him
from the suspicious cantebank. The Marshal then installed the startled child in Hand Row, the small foundlingery
down in the Low Gutter, and taught him the common tongue until Twörp was old enough to begin prenticing.

tykehound(s) (noun) collective noun for a set of dog breeds raised to hunt and slay monsters. The collection of
tykehounds includes tykehounds themselves (sometimes also called selthounds — see next point), spangled whelphounds, Greater Derehunds, garmirvithars and stafirhunds. Their counterparts are the slothounds, who are trained to
track monsters from even the faintest trail and corner them, rather than come to grapple with them. A curregitor is
the leading dog in a pack of tykehounds, what in our world might be termed an ‘alpha male,’; it runs at the front and
is first into the fight. A canignavor, from the Tutin word meaning ‘lazy dog’ (also langsbain, a Gott word meaning
‘slow-leg’), is the second dog of a tykehound pack; it periodically runs back or lags behind the main chasers waiting
for its everyman masters to tell it the path of the rest of the hunt. These animals are anything but lazy, as their title
misnomically suggests, usually running twice or three times the distance any of its fellows covers in a course. (noun)
also selthounds, specific breed of hound, the largest of all the monster-hunting dogs; with long, heavy snouts; wide
mouths and overlarge teeth for an irresistibly gripping bite; thickly gathered hide about the neck to prevent a monster
from throttling it; covered in thick, short, wiry black hair and with powerful hips and shoulders, large paws and great
cunning. Some of the most famous dogs of matter — such as Garngagarr — are of this breed.

U
uhrsprechman (Gott, literally “clock-speaking-man”) also called a night-clerk, found only in cothouses and other
military outposts. Their main task is to complete any paperwork not finished by the day-clerks, sort mail as required
and read the clock and tell the time for the unlettered soldiers about them — of which there are many.

umbergog ettin-like nicker, but possessing an oversized head in deformed simulacrum of an animal's poll. If it
were possible, umbergogs are even more dim-witted than their more manikinlike (personlike) cousins, the ettins,

more bestial — as their heads might imply. Typically they are a little smaller than ettins, but this does not mean that
there are not examples of umbergogs of numbingly enormous size; rivaled only by the singular, portentous
appearances of the mighty, mindless false-gods lumbering across the doomed land.

under-clerk assistant to a clerk, a kind of corporal-clerk, put upon to do the most menial of clerical tasks, the
dullest and most repetitive duties, the ones sent to the less friendly places to act as bureaucrat and paper-shuffler.

under-sergeant military rank used by landed armies but not navies, and the next in rank under a sergeant and
above a pediteer or other 1st class of any type. The equivalent of a corporal.

Under-Sergeant-of-Prentices Benedict see Benedict, Under-Sergeant-of-Prentices.
ungerhaur one of many Gott names for monsters.
üntermen Gott word for monsters, roughly translating to ‘undermen,’ meaning that monsters are less than men. As
a name for monsters it has gained some currency all over the Half-Continent.

V
venificant(s) poison-scripts, also sometimes known as pestilents — these are particularly the more corrupting and
wasting potives. Either way they are all very nasty.

Vey, the Lady ~ official title of Syntychë, the august of the columbines of Herbroulesse. Born to the role and
following her mother through five generations of augusts, five generations of the Lady Vey. Her title comes from a
local corruption of the word ‘fey,’ thought to mean that she ‘convenes with monsters,’ yet it actually come from
Feye, a tiny Soutland state that was absorbed by another larger state almost two centuries ago. Fleeing the subtle
conquest, the Lady Vey's ancestors made their way up to the Idlewild to seclude themselves in a small sequestary
there, and, by ambition, rose to rule it and expand its work. Syntychë is profoundly aware of her proud heritage, of
the aggressive nature of her family's historied grasp on the control of the Right of the Pacific Dove and the dubious
honor it is to be a calendar. Her zeal for her calendars and her heritage is almost consuming.

Vey, Threnody see Threnody of Herbroulesse.
vialimn meaning ‘path-light,’ the ‘correct’ name for a great-lamp.
vigil-day what we would call a holiday.
Volitus dispensurist of Winstermill, originally simply a confectioner from High Vesting, he has managed to gain
status as a true dispenser, though the quality of his work is not always guaranteed. It is fortunate for the others of the
manse that his assistant has a better grasp of habilistics.

W
wandlimb type of ash tree with a narrow trunk whose gracefully long, straight branches are a
favorite for withies, cudgels and the basis for fulgaris.
watch(es) among the lamplighters there are three main watches that do not revolve so much
about four-hour intervals as in the navy, but rather on duties whether it is day or night. During

the day there is the house-watch, whose task it is to maintain the day-to-day running of their
posting; the day-watch, who keep lookout during the sunny hours and rove out beyond their
posting to accomplish the various tasks the day requires. At night while these two watches sleep
it is time for the lantern-watch or lamp-watch to shine (ha! Get it?). Their duty starts with
traveling from their place of day-rest, lighting lamps along the way to the next cothouse or other
fortress, where they stay up all night to keep guard.
wayfood(s) other favorites among hucilluctors are twice-pickled gherkins and evercap, a dainty
mushroom that preserves well when dried and can last for many years still edible, though these
too are preferred pickled — either with pepper or honey. See entry in Book One.
Wayward Chair, the ~ a hostelry of barely a dozen rooms found in the more down-at-heel suburb
of Marlabone in the city of Compostor; run by a Mr. and Mrs. Phile, and not particularly well
known for its appointments or refinements. Why Europe chooses to stay there is a bit of a
mystery, for she usually prefers the finer establishments if she can have them, and there is
certainly more than one of those in that city.
Wellnigh House the small twin-keep cothouse most immediately east of Winstermill, gaining its
name because it is well-nigh to both Winstermill and the Tumblesloe Heap. It was once the
tollhouse for those coming through or entering the Roughmarch, the toll helping to pay to keep
the marche clear of the thick briars and thorns that ever seek to choke the path.
Wheede, Crofton a somewhat clumsy and ineffectual by of average build and average
intelligence, and one of the other prentices at Winstermill. He is actually a native of the Idlewild
itself, from a line of cobblers in Hinkerseigh. His other was slain in a theroscade during a
summertime Domesday stroll, his father killed by grief and the viscid humours (a terrible
contagious disease said to be spread by nickers). Young Wheede has been shipped off by
surviving uncles and aunts to serve with the lighters.
“When falsemen disagree...” comes from an aphorism, "When falsemen disagree, to whom then
can the truth be known?"
Whympre, Podious pronounced “Po’dee’us Wim’per”; see Master-of-Clerks.
Wight, the ~ also known as Wightbury; Imperial designation of the Imperial fortress-city of
Wightfastseigh, built to collect tolls on goods coming down from Sulk and eastern Catalain and
the Undermeer states. It is a center of military might in the midst of the Idlewild and the pivot
between two themes of the Placidine and the Paucitine, with each settlement of the Idlewild
providing contingents of pediteers and even swaggerers to its guard. Yet despite its size and
impressive fortifications, it has no direct jurisdiction over the Wormway or in political affairs in
the Idlewild (though citizens of influence might have their say). Indeed the cothouses in the
Wight are no larger than those along the lonely road; this city is all about taxation revenue and the
protection of its collection and the trade route that most supplies it. The citizens of the Wight
themselves are generally very concerned with the latest fashions, importing all the new fads and
baubles they can from down south — where all the best people dwell.
Wightfastseigh see the Wight.
Wine-of-Sellry see Sellry, wine-of.
Winstermill great Imperial fortress of Sulk End and home to the lamplighters of the Wormway.

Winstreslewe, the ancient, abandoned Tutin fortress upon whose foundations it was built, was
itself constructed about and upon an even more ancient great hall and motte. This great hall was
once a seat of power for the Burgundian kings before they were pushed aside by the greater might
of the Tutins of old. Winstermill is the first port of call for anyone wishing to enter the Idlewild.
It is the administrative center, whence are issued all Imperial writs and certificates that allow
easier passage through the varied bureaucracies of the colonies along the Wormway. See
Appendix 5 and entity in Book One.
Winstermill, serving staff of ~ an astounding collection of people somehow find their home in
the fortress: metalsmiths, wheelwrights, coopers, gaulders, cobblers, tailors, house-tinkers,
glaziers, armorers, ostlers, farriers, feuterers, storemen, stewards, cooks, menservants, parlor
maids, bower maids, scullery maids, fullers, porters, lighter's boys, pageboys and general hands.
wit(s) lahzars who are able to send out pulses of invisible ‘static’ to afflict people's minds. It is
well known that wits lose their hair as they continue to use their potency, and a calvine or calvous
wit is a wit completely without hair. There are those wits known as mesmerists, who are skilled
in and prefer subtle and gentle techniques of frission, coercing rather than blasting them with
great feats of striving. To be a mesmerist takes great skill, but overspecializing makes one less
able to put forth powerful yet well-controlled frission in singularly destructive striving. The
opposite of mesmerists are striveners, who practice mighty yet tightly controlled assaults of
frission, the perfecters of the nex aspectus — the killing look or ‘eye of death.’ In a similar way
coruscists are fulgars who do not thermistor, who do not wish to take the risk of blasting
themselves apart if the botch the summoning of lightning. See entry in Book One.
Witherscrawl trained as a mathematician, he is the indexer and stooge of the Master-of-Clerks.
See Witherscrawl, Mister in Book One.
withy-wall(s) usually naturally occurring barriers of sapling stems (withies).
works-general properly called the General-Master-of-Labors, the highest ranked peoneer in
Winstermill. His charge includes all of the maintenance and works about the fortress and on the
road too; he also has charge over the seltzermen as well as the more common laborers. This is
part of the reason why lighters do not truly consider seltzermen to be their equals — they belong
to another corps.
Wormstool very last cothouse on the eastern end of the Conduit Vermis (from which it gets it
name) with only the fortress of Haltmire between it and the untamed wilds. Built simultaneously
with Haltmire, at the time when the Wormway was being forged through the Ichormeer,
Wormstool is an octagonal tower rather than the usual fortress-house. It shares this trait with
Dovecote Bolt and is reached by narrow steps wrapping about three of the structure's sides. On
every level, the windows are shuttered loopholes through which defenders can fire down upon
attackers. There is provision for cannon on the third level and on the roof, yet pieces have never
been supplied and Wormstool remains without great-guns, despite the presence of umbergogs and
other belugigs on the Frugelle.
Wormway, the ~ vernacular name for the Conduit Vermis (see both entries in Book One); also
called the Harrowmath Pike. The Wormway is divided into named lengths:
¨
¨
¨

Pettiwiggin — from Winstermill to Wellnigh House
Roughmarch Road — from Wellnigh House to Dovecote Bolt
Mirthway or Mirthle Road — from Dovecote Bolt to Makepeace

¨
¨
¨

Half-wiggin Pike — from Makepeace to the Wight
Pendant Wig — from the Wight to Bleak Lynche
The Frugal Way — from Bleak Lynche to Haltmire and through to the Ichormeer.

Wrangle poor boy of obscure origins who goes by this name and this name alone — of too
destitute a beginning, it seems, to have more than a first name. A fairly slow-witted but
physically adept lad, he is the perfect candidate for a soldier — or lighter.
wrench-of-arms what we would call arm-wrestling.

X
Blood and sutures! No entry for x!

Y
Yesternight last night, the counterpart of yesterday.

Z
Pullets and cockerels! Still no entry for z! How is this possible?

Table of Contents
Title Page
Copyright Page
Dedication
One
Two
Three
Four
Five
Six
Seven
Eight
Nine
Ten
Eleven
Twelve
Thirteen
Fourteen
Fifteen
Sixteen
Seventeen
Eighteen
Nineteen
Twenty

About the Author

Praise for the Novels of S. L. Viehl StarDoc
"I don't read much science fiction, but I got ahold of a manuscript copy of StarDoc and just loved it. Don't miss this one."--Catherine Coulter
"Continuously surprising and deviously written and splendidly full of new characters."--Anne McCaffrey
"Space opera somewhat reminiscent of C. J. Cherryh's early work."--Chronicle
"An entertaining, almost old-fashioned adventure. . . . The adventure and quirky mix of aliens and cultures make a fun combination."--Locus
"An excellent protagonist. . . . [Viehl has] set the stage for an interesting series of interspecies medical adventures."
--Space.com
"Space opera and medical melodrama mix with a dash of romance in this engaging novel . . . a rousing good yarn, with plenty of plot twists, inventive
scene setting, and quirky characters to keep readers thoroughly entertained. . . . StarDoc is a fun adventure story with an appealing heroine, a lot of
action, a sly sense of humor, and wonders aplenty."--SF Site
"A fascinating reading experience . . . a wonderful heroine." -- Midwest Book Review
Beyond Varallan
"[Cherijo is] an engaging lead character. . . . Viehl skillfully weaves in the clues to build a murder mystery with several surprising ramifications."-Space.com
Endurance
"An exciting science fiction tale . . . fast-paced and exciting. . . . SF fans will fully enjoy S. L. Viehl's entertaining entry in one of the better ongoing series
today."
--Midwest Book Review
"[Endurance] gets into more eclectic and darker territory than most space opera, but it's a pretty engrossing trip. Recommended."--Hypatia's Hoard
"A rousing medical space opera. . . . Viehl employs misdirection and humor, while not defusing the intense plot development that builds toward an
explosive conclusion."
--Romantic Times
Shockball
"Genetically enhanced fun. . . . Cherijo herself has been justly praised as a breath of fresh air--smart [and] saucy. . . . The reader seems to be invited along
as an amicable companion, and such is the force of Cherijo's personality that it sounds like fun."--Science Fiction Weekly
"Fast-paced . . . an entertaining installment in the continuing adventures of the StarDoc."--Locus
"An exhilarating science fiction space adventure. The zestful story line stays at warp speed. . . . Cherijo is as fresh as ever. . . . Fans of futuristic outer
space novels will want to take off with this tale and the three previous StarDoc books, as all four stories take the audience where they rarely have been
before."--Midwest Book Review
Eternity Row
"Space opera at its very best. . . . Viehl has created a character and a futuristic setting that is second to none in its readability, quality, and social mores."
--Midwest Book Review
"S. L. Viehl serves readers her usual highly entertaining mix of humor and space opera. This episode is enlivened by the antics of [Cherijo's] daughter,
Marel, and by an exploration of aging and immortality. As usual, I look forward to the next in an exciting series."--BookLoons
Rebel Ice
"Well-drawn cultures and fascinating aliens."
--Publishers Weekly
"It's fast, fun, character-driven, and left me wanting more . . . one of my all-time favorite sci-fi series."
--Fresh Fiction
"Both gritty and realistic."--Romantic Times
"A thrilling addition to the series."-- Booklist
"A wonderful piece of space opera."--SFRevu
"Seems very realistic--almost as if the author visited that world and decided to write about it. Rebel Ice is a terrific outer space science fiction novel."-Bookwatch
Plague of Memory
"Another exciting adventure in this well-regarded series."
--Monsters and Critics
Blade Dancer
"Fast-moving, thought-provoking, and just plain damn fun. S. L. Viehl has once again nailed it."--Linda Howard
"A heartrending, passionate, breathtaking adventure of a novel that rips your feet out from under you on page one and never lets you regain them until the
amazing finale. Stunning."--Holly Lisle

ALSO BY S. L. VIEHL
StarDoc
Beyond Varallan
Endurance
Shockball
Eternity Row
Rebel Ice
Plague of Memory
Omega Games
Blade Dancer
Bio Rescue
Afterburn

ROC
Published by New American Library, a division of
Penguin Group (USA) Inc., 375 Hudson Street,
New York, New York 10014, USA
Penguin Group (Canada), 90 Eglinton Avenue East, Suite 700, Toronto,
Ontario M4P 2Y3, Canada (a division of Pearson Penguin Canada Inc.)
Penguin Books Ltd., 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England
Penguin Ireland, 25 St. Stephen's Green, Dublin 2,
Ireland (a division of Penguin Books Ltd.)
Penguin Group (Australia), 250 Camberwell Road, Camberwell, Victoria 3124,
Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty. Ltd.)
Penguin Books India Pvt. Ltd., 11 Community Centre, Panchsheel Park,
New Delhi - 110 017, India
Penguin Group (NZ), 67 Apollo Drive, Rosedale, North Shore 0632,
New Zealand (a division of Pearson New Zealand Ltd.)
Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty.) Ltd., 24 Sturdee Avenue,
Rosebank, Johannesburg 2196, South Africa
Penguin Books Ltd., Registered Offices:
80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England
First published by Roc, an imprint of New American Library, a division of Penguin Group (USA) Inc.
First Printing, August
Copyright (c) S. L. Viehl, 2009
eISBN : 978-1-101-10820-8
All rights reserved
REGISTERED TRADEMARK--MARCAREGISTRADA
Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above, no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form, or by any
means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise), without the prior written permission of both the copyright owner and the above publisher of this book.
PUBLISHER'S NOTE
This is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places, and incidents either are the product of the author's imagination or are used fictitiously, and any resemblance to actual persons, living or
dead, business establishments, events, or locales is entirely coincidental.
The publisher does not have any control over and does not assume any responsibility for author or third-party Web sites or their content.
The scanning, uploading, and distribution of this book via the Internet or via any other means without the permission of the publisher is illegal and punishable by law. Please purchase only
authorized electronic editions, and do not participate in or encourage electronic piracy of copyrighted materials. Your support of the author's rights is appreciated.
http://us.penguingroup.com

"To live as a doctor is to live so that one's life is
bound up in others' and in science and in the messy,
complicated connection between the two."
--Dr. Atul Gawande

One
The Iisleg, the people of my homeworld of Akkabarr, never believed in peace. The word itself has no meaning in their language. They name the time
between conflicts as either malatkinin, an opportunity to recover from the last battle, or kininharkal, the chance to prepare for the next.
Until this moment, I thought I had left that sort of idiocy behind on my homeworld.
"You can't do this."
The dark blue faces of the three males watching me remained impassive as I rose from the conference table and moved around the room. Someone
clever had worked hundreds of t'vessna flowers into various arrangements, doubtless to honor my return. I plucked one small purple flower from a hanging
silver basket and held it to my nose. The sweet fragrance calmed me a little.
I had been brought here after my husband and I returned to Joren, the homeworld of my adopted people, and landed our scout vessel Moonfire at
HouseClan Torin's main transport. I had been told the meeting was some sort of official welcome. Instead, I had been treated to an intense round of
questioning, and informed of what amounted to a declaration of war on another world.
"Healer Torin."
They didn't like my moving around; they wanted me where they could see my face. I returned to the table. "You can't do this," I repeated. "Over two
thousand beings live on that colony."
"Your pardon, Healer Torin, but we must." Malaoan Adan, the Jorenian Ruling Council's chief legal adviser, was the oldest of the three, judging by the
number of purple streaks running through his braided black hair. He spoke slowly and carefully, both to project the gravity of the situation and so that the
vocollar translation device I wore around my neck converted his words correctly into Iisleg, an obscure form of Terran, the only language I understood.
"This matter has now become a legal issue."
"How so?" I knew almost nothing about Jorenian law, but as I remained one of Joren's chosen rulers, I saw no reason to confess that. "I have related to
you everything that happened to me and my husband."
"I must respectfully question your account of the events, Healer." Volea, HouseClan Torin's chief of security, wore his solid black hair in a warrior's knot,
and had several healed scars on his face from blades, pulse burns, and impact injuries.
If they doubted me, they had some reason to do so. "On what basis?"
Volea consulted the datapad in his hand. "According to the information retrieved from the Moonfire's database, your ship did not make an emergency
landing; it was fired upon and crashed. Audio records indicate that you and your bondmate were forcibly removed by drones not under your command."
"You have interpreted the data incorrectly." I was glad my husband had survived our ordeal on Trellus, because as soon as I saw him, I was going to kill
him. "While we were journeying through space, my husband and I ran some simulations of those scenarios. The database and the audio records must
have been damaged during the emergency landing, or they would indicate that."
Volea shifted in his seat. "Healer, biodecon scans performed on the Sunlace revealed new tissue that would indicate you and your bondmate sustained
multiple recently healed injuries."
"Reever and I both acquired some minor flesh wounds while running the simulations." I smiled. "Our bruises and scratches were no more serious than
what one would sustain during a practice sparring match with a drone opponent."
"You did not fight a drone," said Xonea, my adopted ClanBrother and captain of the Sunlace. The largest of the three males, he commanded attention,
although I hadn't given him much. Xonea troubled me for a number of reasons, not the least of which was the ominous suppressed emotion glittering in his
white-within-white eyes. "We detected Sovant's DNA embedded in your garments. What say you tell us how you simulated that?"
I thought of the alien predator I had helped to capture and exterminate on the quarantined colony of Trellus. It had been a voracious, horrific thing that
had possessed the bodies of sentient beings, destroying their minds and then masquerading as their prey while devouring them from the inside out. I
could not tell them that Reever and I had been forced down on the planet to serve as bait for it.
"That was likely from some form of accidental contact." I clamped down on my rising temper. "We could have brushed up against something already
contaminated with the DNA."
"Indeed." Xonea flattened his six-fingered hands on the table and leaned forward. "You and Reever unintentionally collided with something doused with
at least two liters of Sovant blood, bone, and brain tissue?"
I couldn't tell him about the final battle we had fought with the colonists against the Sovant, so I folded my hands in my lap. "Garments become
contaminated with all manner of foreign DNA, particularly when one visits a multispecies colony. It may have happened over a period of weeks--"
"Healer, there is no need to deceive us any longer," Malaoan said gently. "You are under no obligation to protect the Trellusans. It is clear to us that they
committed or were involved in these acts. We have only to declare ClanKill before a witness of your House."
Now I understood their unwavering determination to pursue complete extermination. On Joren, if one makes a threat against one of the people in the
presence of his blood kin, he would be publicly declared ClanKill, treated as prey, and hunted down by the entire HouseClan. The Jorenians would not
stop until he was caught, and whoever did so first would eviscerate him with their bare hands.
Such was always done, even if the offender had made only a verbal threat. What had happened to me and my husband on Trellus had been much
worse, and they had evidence of it. Naturally, they were outraged.
This was why these three calm, pleasant men were proposing to send Jorenian ships to Trellus to destroy the entire colony from orbit.
I needed to stall them until I could find Reever. "There is no reason to declare ClanKill on the Trellusans," I said as firmly as I could. "My husband and I
have returned safely to Joren."
Volea smiled at me. "For this we thank the Mother of all Houses each day."
With his hands--Jorenians used gestures as well as words to speak--Malaoan made a beautiful motion that I recognized as agreement. "We
understand your inherent need to preserve life, Healer Torin, but in this case it is not applicable under the law."
"Really." I needed to change some laws.
He nodded quickly. "Multiple offenses have been committed. The colony is small and has few defenses. We need send but two or three vessels to
eradicate the population. We would not have troubled you with this matter, but we wished to reassure you that justice will be served."
The pressure increasing at my temples made me imagine for a moment my skull flying apart. "You are not listening to me. I was stranded on the colony
with my husband. I know what happened and who was involved. The colonists are not guilty of any crime. I made a full report. It is over. I wish to see my
daughter now."
"So you will, once this matter is decided." Xonea smiled at me, and not in a particularly friendly fashion. "As first ClanSon of the Torin, I say it is far from
finished."
I heard a sound that made me think of the jaws of an ice snare snapping around my ankle. Fortunately, it was the access panel behind me, opening to
admit a tall, lean male dressed in black garments, his golden hair loose around his handsome if somewhat impassive features.

"Duncan." I rose and almost knocked over a stand of t'vessna worked into the Jorenian symbol for the path, and went to my husband, taking his hands
in mine. I needed to touch him in order to establish a telepathic link between our minds. They are going to send a fleet of ships to destroy Trellus. They

found evidence of what happened and they're blaming the colonists. They even found the wretched Sovant's DNA on our garments when we were
scanned.
Worry not, beloved. He pressed his mouth briefly to my brow before his clear blue eyes moved to study the faces of the other males. "I was not made
aware that this welcoming committee intended to separate me from my wife in order to intimidate and interrogate her."
Malaoan and Volea shifted in their chairs, clearly uncomfortable.
Xonea, in contrast, didn't twitch a muscle. "Much as we were not made aware of your true reason for leaving Joren. Sit down, Duncan."
When I began to tell him that he had no right to order either of us to do anything, Reever put one of his hands over mine. One newly healed wound
slashed across the lattice of old white scars covering the flesh from his knuckles to his wrist.
"As you say, Captain." He led me back to the table and sat down with me, his eyes never leaving Xonea's. "Before anything more is said or decided,
Jarn and I shield the colonists of Trellus."
"As bondmate of a naturalized Jorenian, you have limited rights under our laws, Linguist Reever," Volea said, his tone decidedly cool. "They do not
include making decisions for a Ruling Council member, or shielding those responsible for threatening her life."
"Then I will say the words," I told him. "I shield the colonists of Trellus."
Malaoan's expression turned sympathetic. "Under ordinary circumstances, that would be acceptable, Healer, but in this case special considerations for
your current mental state must be made."
I tried not to grit my teeth. "What has my mental state to do with anything?"
"Your medical records indicate that you suffered extensive brain damage and severe emotional trauma while being held captive on Akkabarr," the legal
adviser said. "You persist in referring to yourself as another persona named Jarn. Add to this the ordeal you must have endured on Trellus, and it is
apparent that your ability to make rational decisions has been compromised. In such cases, under Jorenian law, the affected individual's HouseClan is
required to intervene and provide consent."
It took my vocollar a few moments to relate all that to me in the language I could understand. Not that I understood it. "Do you mean to say that I am too
crazy to shield the Trellusans?"
"No," Reever said, his eyes never leaving Xonea's face. "He is saying you need a member of HouseClan Torin to approve your decision."
"The Healer's closest blood kin, to be precise," Malaoan clarified.
Reever spared him a glance. "My wife is not Jorenian by blood or birth. Her only blood relative is deceased. Under Terran law, as her husband, I am her
closest relative."
"Once my ClanBrother Kao Chose her, Cherijo became Torin," Xonea said. "After he embraced the stars, my House assured that she would remain our
kin by granting her citizenship and formally adopting her."
I felt bewildered, as I often did when being confronted by actions I had never taken. All of these things had happened to Cherijo Grey Veil, the woman
who had inhabited my body before dying on Akkabarr.
"I do not consider myself Terran or Jorenian," I reminded them. "I was born on Akkabarr, among the skela of the Iisleg. According to their laws, I am the
property of my husband and subject to his will alone."
"You may consider yourself whatever you wish, Healer," Malaoan said kindly, "but your citizenship has never been revoked by you or your HouseClan.
As such, it takes precedence over this claim of Akkabarran citizenship."
"Very well." It seemed obvious that they weren't going to allow me to escape this special consideration. "So who do you define as my closest blood
kin?"
"That"--Xonea kept his gaze locked with Reever's--"would be me."
If I was not crazy now, I soon would be driven to that unhappy state. "Then, Captain, would you please give me your approval?"
At last he turned toward me. "First you will provide more information so that I may know you are making a wise choice."
My limited experience in dealing with my adopted Jorenian brother had not been terribly successful. On a previous occasion, when he had tried to
prevent me from attending to the victims of a plague that was destroying the Hsktskt homeworld of Vtaga, I had been forced to threaten to take away his
command in order to stop his interference.
Now, it seemed, he had the upper hand. My former self had referred to this sort of situation in her journals. She had called it payback time .
I resigned myself to dodging more questions. "What do you wish to know, Captain?"
The big male sat back in his chair, seemingly at ease now. "I want the name of the offworlder who harmed the female patient you operated on just
before you and Duncan departed Joren. I want to know why you concealed the fact that the explosive device implanted in her body was mounted with a
trigger specifically designed to detonate upon contact with your DNA. I want to know who is trying to assassinate you."
Xonea didn't care for my request for time to verify the medical facts behind his last barrage of demands, but I felt sure he wouldn't accuse me of stalling
in front of the other Jorenians. He didn't. Nor did he protest when I suggested we reconvene the meeting at HouseClan Torin's medical facility in the
morning. I think he knew he had me right where he wanted me. I think my husband's cold, unwavering stare also may have played a part.
Volea and Malaoan, who also sensed the rising tension between Xonea and Reever, quickly agreed to an adjournment, and after making polite farewell
gestures, departed. As my ClanBrother left the conference room, he paused for a moment to loom over me.
"If the true reason for this fact-finding delay is to provide time for you and Duncan to leave Joren," he said, a muscle twitching under his eye, "you will
find that you must also obtain my permission for travel offworld."
"Why would I want to do that?" I made my expression bland. "According to you, I am a mental deficient, and you have seen to it that I will be treated like
one. My freedom has been taken away and my decisions will be made for me. Life could not be easier unless I were brain-dead."
"I will have the name of the one responsible for this, Cherijo," Xonea promised, glancing once more at Reever before he strode out.
After the door panel had closed and we were alone, my husband put an arm around me, and I allowed myself to lean against his shoulder.
I felt as weary as if I had spent three days fighting in a bloodsports simulator, until I formed a new link with my husband and his strength came flooding
through it. How much do you think he knows about what really happened to us on Trellus?
Enough to justify an attack on the colony. Out loud, Reever said, "Marel is waiting for us with Salo, Darea, and Fasala at the pavilion. They arranged
for us to have a private meal with them."
I hated that we could not speak openly and freely, but Reever and I both suspected that the Jorenians were keeping us under constant drone
surveillance--on Xonea's orders, no doubt. "Then why are we standing here?"
After spending all my life on the frozen, wind-torn surface of Akkabarr, then weeks in the crowded, utilitarian envirodomes of an airless rock like Trellus, I
could better appreciate the vivid charms of Joren. Above our glidecar, the sky, streaked with a multitude of colors, looked down at its beautiful reflection in
the wide, gleaming fields of silvery yiborra grass. Flowering plants, the main staple of the Jorenian diet, grew everywhere, and in more colors than I could
name. Nor did I mind the warmth and mild climate, although I suspected I would never feel at home anywhere but on the ice fields.

name. Nor did I mind the warmth and mild climate, although I suspected I would never feel at home anywhere but on the ice fields.
"It is lovely here," I said to Reever. "Did Cherijo like it?"
"She did, although we never had the chance to spend very much time on Joren." Reever maneuvered the vehicle around a slower-moving transport
conveying cargo containers and some strange-looking equipment. "Do you remember anything of Terra?"
"I have your memories of North America and France." I did not wish to insult his natal world, but both regions had seemed sterile, boring, and
overpopulated. "We will never return there, will we?"
"No." He sounded grim. "It would be too dangerous. We . . . Cherijo and I barely escaped with our lives the last time we were on Terra."
The only blood family my former self could claim, aside from Marel, were the other products of Joseph Grey Veil's illegal experiments in genetically
engineering humans. I knew from her journals that Cherijo believed she had several "brothers" who, like her, had been made in Grey Veil's laboratory,
although something had gone wrong with each of them. One in particular, a disturbed young male named Rico, had captured and tried to kill both her and
Reever as vengeance for how cruelly he was treated by their "father."
I had no desire to visit Terra, and I could not think of returning to Akkabarr, not after experiencing the freedom of living among the ensleg. Offworld
species like the Jorenians respected and valued their females; they were considered equal to males. The rebellion had changed how females were
regarded on Akkabarr--we had gained much status while caring for the wounded on and off the battlefield--but if I ever returned to live among the Iisleg, I
could still be beaten to death for something as minor as questioning an order issued to me by any male. So, for that matter, could Marel.
It struck me then how dangerous this situation with Xonea was. If I did not make peace with him, he might repudiate me, Reever, and Marel from
HouseClan Torin. I did not know the laws governing those who had been thus expelled, but I doubted I would remain a member of the Ruling Council or be
permitted to make a home among the Jorenians here unless I also remained a ClanDaughter of the Torin.
If I did not settle this and secure our place among the Jorenians, we might have no homeworld.
Like the Iisleg tribes on Akkabarr, the Torin resided together, only in much larger numbers than the people of the iiskar I had known. Each HouseClan
occupied a native pavilion, a massive complex of adjoining structures in which every member of the HouseClan dwelled under one roof. The Torin
pavilion, built of glowing white stone, was so large that it resembled a small range of ice cliffs.
The only time Torins left their pavilions was when they selected mates, joined the crew of a HouseClan vessel on a sojourn, or traveled to visit friends or
blood kin who resided elsewhere. Females were obliged to Choose a husband from an outside HouseClan, and leave their natal HouseClan to reside
with their bondmate and his blood kin after their joining ritual; this likely to prevent inbreeding.
When Reever and I had departed Joren the last time, we had asked Salo and Darea Torin to keep Marel and watch over her.The parents of Marel's
favorite playmate, Fasala Torin, Salo and Darea had taken our daughter with them on an extended journey to visit other HouseClans. Reever and I never
wished to be separated from our child, but after Marel had been abducted with me and Reever on Vtaga, we were determined to take stronger measures
to protect her from harm--even if that meant leaving her behind to be protected by our friends.
Reever and I were greeted by every Torin we passed at the pavilion, so it took some time and many promises to meet again before we could go to the
private room where our child and friends were waiting. But Marel found us before we reached the dining chamber; she rushed around a corner and threw
herself into her father's arms, pressing noisy kisses against his cheeks.
"ClanFather! You're back. I've missed you so much."
"As I have you, avasa." Over her head Reever exchanged a glance with me. The activation and translation from my vocollar indicated that Marel had
spoken to him in flawless Jorenian.
I did not mind if she preferred to use the language of Cherijo's adopted people over her cradle tongue. From what Reever had told me, Terrans had not
done a great deal to distinguish themselves among the sentient species of the galaxy--other than becoming hostile isolationists and xenophobes who
liked to start wars.
"Was I not missed as well?" I asked the wall panel.
Bubbly blond curls bounced as wide, clear blue eyes fixed on me. "ClanMother." She wriggled until Reever set her down on her feet, and then gazed up
at me solemnly. "Your pardon, Mama," she said in Terran. "I know you don't speak Jorenian."
"I have no doubt they will force me to learn it someday soon." I crouched down in front of her and performed a quick visual assessment. My small,
delicate daughter didn't weigh much, but she practically glowed with good health. "You have behaved well for Salo and Darea while we have been gone?"
I watched her nod. "You have studied your lessons and attended your teacher's directions faithfully?" Another nod. "Did you kill anything interesting during
your journey?"
"Mama, I told you before, we don't use animals for . . ." Dimples appeared in her soft, round cheeks. "You know I didn't kill anything."
"I thought I should check, just in case." I touched my brow to hers in Jorenian fashion. "Daddy and I missed you every day." As her arms encircled my
neck, my love for this small, beautiful creature clawed beneath my breastbone, tearing at my heart. I had never known such sweet pain as this, and I would
do anything to keep feeling it forever.
It was not possible, I knew. While Reever and I had been physically altered to be virtually immortal, Marel had not. Our child would keep growing and
aging until she reached the end of a normal Terran life span, when she would die--unless I did as Reever had asked me to and altered Marel's body with
chameleon cells, which, as they had for her father, would repair any cellular damage she acquired from age, disease, or injury.
I had refused to do it. Immortality had been a curse on my former self; because Cherijo had been created with an immune system that didn't allow her to
become ill or age, she had been experimented on, hunted, imprisoned, tortured, and otherwise abused. As much as I wanted Marel as a part of our lives, I
would not deliberately inflict the same fate on my child.
My husband rested one of his scarred hands atop our daughter's head. It seemed strange that two such unlikely parents had created such a glorious
being. I had no memory of her, and before meeting my daughter I had existed in a strange, frozen state that did not allow me to care for anyone. Reever's
childhood, spent on one alien world after another, had deprived him of feeling or showing true human emotion.
Marel and the love she had brought into our lives were slowly righting the terrible wrongs done to us.
"Come," I said, standing and holding out my hand. "We should not keep Salo and Darea waiting."
Unfamiliar with the pavilion's interior, I expected to walk into our friends' quarters, but instead Marel led me into an enormous area well able to entertain
a thousand. It had been decorated with cascading showers of purple, gold, and green flowers; baskets of fruit; and several small trees.
In the center of a web of woven yiborra grass, a single table draped with a densely embroidered cloth stood packed with enough food to keep an Iisleg
hunter and his family fed for an entire season. Salo and Darea were at a prep unit, filling servers with hot, fragrant tea, and their daughter had just set
down yet another platter of golden, intricately shaped breads.
"Is the rest of the HouseClan joining us?" I asked Marel as I admired the bounty.
She grinned up at me. "They wanted to. Everyone is happy that you're home, Mama."
The three Torins greeted us with smiles and fond embraces. Like all Jorenian children, Fasala had grown quickly, and now stood almost as tall as her
regal-looking warrior ClanMother. From her ClanFather she had inherited a calm, thoughtful demeanor that often made her seem older than she was. Only
when she grinned and chatted with our daughter during the meal did I remember that she was barely halfway through adolescence.
"Fasala was Marel's size when we first met Cherijo," Darea said as she, too, watched the girls. "Soon she will be a woman, walking her own path.
During our journey she told us that she wishes to go to Omorr to study planetary engineering. She wants to someday help build new worlds for those who

have lost theirs."
World building had become a critical industry since the war between the Hsktskt and the Allied League of Worlds. Both sides had decimated and
destroyed hundreds of planets during their battles; thousands of species had been displaced as homeless refugees.
"That is a noble and useful ambition," I said. "Just before we left Trellus, the colonists gave us an Aksellan planetary mining map. It is handmade and
very old. Perhaps Fasala would like to see a scan of it? I can transmit a copy to your quarters."
"That would be of great interest to her. She spends most of her time studying maps and star charts." Darea's mouth tightened before she took a sip
from her server of tea.
I knew that look. I saw it on my own face whenever Marel did something to worry me. "You are not entirely happy with Fasala's plans."
"In truth, I cannot bear to think of her so far away from us," the Jorenian woman admitted. "If something were to happen to her while she is studying on
Omorr, it would take weeks for us to reach her."
I would have pointed out that the Omorr were an honorable species, and especially protective of children, but I knew she didn't distrust them. "When
Reever and I left Marel with you, I could not relax. Even as I know you and Salo regard her as if she were Fasala's sibling, the little one is my child. My
head knows that she was safe with you, but my heart still believes that no one can protect her as well as I."
"Yes. That is exactly what I feel." Darea set down her server with a small thump. "We create these children in honor, and bring them into our world so
that we may fulfill our Choice. Then but a few, paltry revolutions later, we must allow them to leave us and walk their own path." Her jaw set. "How did our
ClanMothers manage to do it?"
"I cannot say." I did not have to remind her that neither I nor my former self had been born to a living woman, for she immediately remembered and
made an apologetic gesture. "No, Darea, I am not offended. I was never a child except in my mind. Our headwoman, Daneeb, would tell the new skela
who were cast out of the iiskar and came to us to live in the now rather than memory or hope. That to dwell on what was, or what may be, diminishes our
appreciation for what is."
The tight lines around Darea's mouth eased, and her expression turned thoughtful. "She was right. All we truly ever have is what is."
Neither Reever nor I were particularly hungry, not after the troubling reception we'd been given at Main Transport. Still, I tried to eat as much as possible.
On my homeworld, to waste food was unthinkable. I was gratified to see that the Torins, with their enormous Jorenian appetites, made short work of the
feast.
Darea spoke only of their journey until the two girls excused themselves to attend to feeding the small cats, Jenner, Juliet, and their new litter of kittens.
When we were alone, she nodded to Salo, who secured the outer door panel before setting two devices on the table and switching on the smallest of the
pair. It projected a semitransparent field of pale green light that enclosed the table and the four of us.
"We may speak freely now," Darea said, and nodded toward the device. "Salo brought this signal jam mer after he noticed several recording drones
had been planted in this room. You know, of course, who arranged for us to meet here."
Reever's expression darkened. "Xonea."
Salo made an uneasy gesture. "Duncan, neither Darea nor I condone what our ClanBrother is doing. Spying on you and Jarn is an unpardonable
intrusion. I will challenge Xonea to explain himself before the HouseClan . . . if that is your wish."
"No," I said, before my husband could respond. "That is what Xonea wants: to provoke us into a confrontation, during which he can force us to disclose
what happened to us on Trellus."
It seemed ironic that Xonea was doing all this--monitoring us, having me declared incompetent, threatening to destroy the colony--in order to get what
he wanted. Aleksei Davidov had been equally inventive and ruthless when he used similar tactics to force us to help him draw out and kill the Sovant.
"Can you tell us what this is about?" Salo asked. "It would help to know, and we will not speak of it outside these walls."
I glanced at my husband, who nodded, and began relating what had happened, from the surgery I had performed on the Jorenian female who had been
made into a living bomb to our last day on Trellus.
I related our battle to find and destroy the Sovant, as well our discovery of a surface crater filled with black crystal, the indestructible, poisonous mineral
life-form that Cherijo's alien surrogate mother, Maggie, warned would eventually wipe out all life in our galaxy. I also told them of Tya, one of the Odnallak,
the last survivors of the species that had created the black crystal. I did not mention Swap, the larval rogur who with Tya's help had saved all of us, and
whose existence Reever and I had sworn to keep secret.
"The name of the Terran who instigated this," Salo said. "That is what Xonea wants."
During the interrogation, I had not named Alek, Reever's former friend, or mentioned that he had lured us from Joren and forced us to crash on Trellus in
order to use us as bait for the Sovant. "He will be disappointed, then."
"Not if I tell him," my husband said.
"We can't." I knew Reever was still angry over his friend's deception and the terrible danger he had exposed us to. But after the Sovant died, Alek had
told us why he had gone to such lengths, and although I didn't condone what he had done, I understood his motivation. "We agreed to let him go."
His voice chilled. "Perhaps that should not have been our decision to make."
Reever still felt betrayed, but there was more to it than that. I think he understood only too well the emotions that had driven Alek to do such things. "Do
you remember how you felt when you were searching for Cherijo? How desperate you were? How close to the brink of madness you came?"
Reever didn't like to be reminded of that time. "It is not the same."
"No, it is not. You had hope, and a wife to find," I reminded him. "Your friend did not. He had only a dead wife and her killer. Tell me you would not have
done the same, had the Sovant taken me from you."
"It nearly did, thanks to him."
Reever didn't show many emotions, but he radiated fury now. I didn't like confronting my husband, but I couldn't back down. Not from this. "That is
something for which he has been harshly punished."
"So he can never return to Trellus unless he wishes to die instantly." Reever made a contemptuous sound. "You know as well as I do that he never will.
How is that a punishment?"
"He lost his beloved. He destroyed your trust. Now, I think, he will remain alone for the rest of his days. No love. No friends. No connections. No hope of
happiness." I had seen the emptiness in Alek's eyes; I knew what he had become. I had been the same, a mere shell of a creature, before Reever had
found me. "That is why he wanted them to kill him--why he dared them to. For him, life is the real punishment."
Reever's expression did not change, but his eyes lightened, and he took my hand in his.
"There is something more you should know. We intercepted this transmission just before you returned to Joren." Salo opened the second device, which
turned out to be a small data viewer, and activated the screen.
The image that appeared was that of a lumpy, chin-less, light-skinned being wearing a utilitarian male pilot's jumpsuit hemmed by wide straps and belts
holding a great many odd-shaped weapons and spare ammunition. He wore a helmet filled with an iridescent gas, which moved in lazy swirls as parts of
his face swelled, flapped, and deflated.
After a moment I realized the odd sounds that accompanied the image were speech; he was burbling in his native language. My vocollar did not
translate the sounds into speech, but Reever paid close attention. The being displayed a handful of glowing gems, repeated some of the bubbling sounds

he had made, and then the image abruptly shut down.
"Who is he? Do you understand what he said?" I asked Reever.
My husband pressed a button on the viewer, causing the transmission to replay. "He's a Thekka raider, offering a thousand verdant Rabbat pearls for
information about us, our whereabouts, and security arrangements." He stopped the video and studied the screen carefully.
My heart sank as I recalled Alek's final warning. "He must be the bounty hunter looking for us."
"The Thekka are thieves and murderers, not bounty hunters," Reever said. "They attack cargo ships by launching small drones that attach themselves to
the hull and pump poison into the environmental systems. When everyone inside the ship is dead, they dock with it, board, and retrieve the cargo."
Outrage darkened Darea's face. "That is horrible."
"It is their only real advantage over other species," my husband said calmly. "The poisons they use create a synthetic version of their homeworld
atmosphere, which is highly toxic to most offworlders. In any event, this Thekka is not hunting us."
Salo frowned. "Why then would he offer so much for information?"
"He was forced to make this transmission." Reever adjusted the image so that it focused on and magnified a portion of the Thekka's helmet, and a
dark shape reflected on it. "There. Someone is standing just out of range of the viewer." He enlarged the image again and traced the outlines with his
fingertip.
Whoever had been with the Thekka had been holding a pulse rifle aimed at the mercenary's head.

Two
The Torins assigned large, lavish personal quarters for us at the pavilion and provided every comfort we could wish for. After our meal with Salo and
Darea, we retreated to our rooms and spent the remainder of the evening there with Marel. I took a moment to send a scan of the old Aksellan mining
map I had promised for Fasala to Darea, and then gave our daughter my full attention. It took her some time to tell us all that she had seen and done
during her journey with our friends.
"ClanUncle Salo took us to HouseClan Kalea, and their ClanLeaders look like us, Mama," my daughter said as she brought her image viewer to me.
"Kol and Jory are part Terran, see?"
I examined the picture of Marel standing between a male and female at a gathering in a beautiful formal garden. The pair was tall and wore Jorenian
garments, but the female's black hair was short and curly, and the male had only five fingers. Both had tanned but definitely Terran skin.
"They are a handsome couple." I noted the other Jorenians around them also appeared to be crossbreeds with a variety of interesting body types. "Did
they speak to you in Terran as well?"
"Jory did because she's from Terra, and she lived there almost her whole life. ClanLeader Kol tried, too, but he's always lived here on Joren, so he
couldn't say some of the sounds. Then Jory laughed and he chased her around the table and pulled her behind a trellis. They stayed back there a long
time." Marel wrinkled her nose. "I think they were kissing. Why do grown-ups always have to kiss each other so much after they bond? It's silly."
"Is it?" Reever leaned over and brushed my mouth with his. "Hmmmm. Do you feel silly, Waenara?"
I smiled up at him. "Not as often as I wish, Osepeke."
"Daddy, stop." Our daughter gave us a disgruntled look. "You're both too old to be kissing all the time."
Despite the happiness I felt in being with my family, I did not sleep well that night. As I lay in my husband's arms and listened to his slow, quiet breathing,
thoughts of Xonea, the Trellusans, and the Thekka mercenary snarled in my mind, tightening into knots of doubt and fear.
Near dawn I gave up and rose, dressing silently so as not to disturb Duncan or Marel. One of our small felines, the silver-furred male called Jenner,
perched on the end of the bed to watch me. As I armed myself with several blades, his blue eyes narrowed, probably out of jealousy that he could not do
the same. My husband and child insisted the cats were warm and affectionate pets, but in their eyes I saw the same, cool deliberation of any clever
predator.
"You will guard them while I am gone," I told the little beast. "Or I will make you into a head wrap for the cold season."
Jenner yawned and jumped down to join his mate, the black-furred Juliet, where she lay curled up with three of their new younglings.
I slipped out and made my way silently through the empty corridors until I found a door that led to the open central courtyard, which the Torins had
decorated with more of the flowering plants they loved and white marble sculptures of male and female Jorenian warriors. The Iisleg sometimes carved
pillars of ice into pleasing shapes for certain tribal celebrations, but I had never seen stone made into people. For a time I sat on a bench by the largest of
the female warrior statues, one that held a primitive, wicked-looking spear as if she might impale ten enemies with it. I looked up at her, wishing I could
borrow some of her fierceness for what lay ahead.
"Who sits at the feet of Shanea Torin?" a deep voice said. A tall, older male with a full head of purple hair stopped before my bench. He wore the colors
of the Torin with a length of woven silver cloth draped from his right shoulder to his left hip, an indication of his rank. Attached to his belt was a cylinder I
recognized as a scroll case, in which important handwritten documents were carried.
He smiled down at me with genuine pleasure. "Ah, it is my favorite healer. Welcome home, ClanDaughter."
"I thank you, ClanLeader Torin." I rose and tried to make a formal gesture of respectful greeting, but found myself in his affectionate embrace. I returned
it, gingerly, before stepping back. "I was just preparing to leave for the medical facility."
"Please an old man and speak with me first." He gestured toward the bench.
I sat, feeling uneasy. As well as being the Torin ClanLeader, Xonal Torin was Xonea's sire. I had met him only a few times, but I knew from Reever's
memories that Xonal and Cherijo had been very close. Talking with him might be as hazardous as crossing a dripping snow bridge.
"We have not had the chance to speak privately since you were returned to us," he said, studying my face. "Darea explained to me about what
happened to Cherijo on Akkabarr. I understand that you are a different person, one named Jarn. May I use that name for you?"
"Of course." It pained me to hear him ask permission for such a thing. On my homeworld, Xonal Torin would be a rasakt, the leader of the tribe. An Iisleg
rasakt would not lower himself to acknowledge my existence, except to issue an order to kill me or drive me from his iiskar. "I do remember you,
ClanLeader. My husband was able to transfer his memories of Cherijo's life to me."
"Then you will remember when the League attacked Joren," he said. "Cherijo surrendered to them in order to prevent an invasion of our world."
They always made her sound so noble. "That was part of her bargain with OverLord TssVar, to give the Hsktskt access to the League ships so that they
could take them over and turn their crews into slaves. In truth, she surrendered herself and eight hundred other unsuspecting beings."
The side of his mouth curled. "Darea mentioned to me that you do not much care for the woman you were."
"I never knew her. I was born the day she died on the ice." I met his white-within-white gaze. "My people, the Iisleg, believe in speaking plainly. The truth
is that Cherijo did many things that I cannot condone, and I do not always care to be associated with decisions I would never have made. But if what I have
said about her offends you, I ask your pardon. I know how much your people honored her."
"Do not trouble yourself, Jarn." He touched my arm in a reassuring manner. "I speak of Cherijo now only so that I might explain why my ClanSon, Xonea,
is so determined to keep and exercise authority over you."
I lifted my eyebrows. "He thinks I will invite the Hsktskt here again?"
"He blames himself for not protecting Cherijo when the League attacked. He swore to his ClanBrother, Kao, that he would never allow her to be
captured or taken from us." Xonal released a heavy sigh as his hands moved like snow drifting down from a still night sky. "Your bondmate was not the
only one who suffered when you--when Cherijo disappeared. Xonea greatly honored her. If not for her bond with Duncan, I think he would have Chosen her
a second time."
"Cherijo wrote in her journals that Xonea Chose her only to protect her when she was suspected of murder," I said. "Later she mentioned protecting him
for the same reasons, but she was angry, and a great deal of what she wrote didn't make sense."
"My ClanSon has great pride. He could never repay Cherijo for what she did for him," he said, "nor, do I think, could he forgive her for deliberately
breaking his Choice of her."
"I thought the only thing that breaks Choice is . . ." I fell silent as Reever's memories told me exactly what she had done. "Cherijo had Squilyp induce
cardiac arrest. She killed herself." And my husband had watched her do it.
"For three minutes--the required amount of time under Jorenian law to be pronounced dead," Xonal said. "The Omorr was able to revive her, but only
just. The shock of it put Cherijo in a coma. When she awoke at last, she Chose Reever."
No wonder the two men sometimes looked as if they wanted to tear each other apart.

"When the story was first told to me, I believed she did so only to prevent my ClanSon from Choosing her again. Now I think not. Cherijo and Reever
were . . ." The ClanLeader made a complicated gesture.
I nodded. What my former self and my husband had been to each other often defied explanation. More of Reever's memories poured into my mind.
"Xonea didn't take the news very well."
"At the time, my ClanSon was under the influence of a psychotropic drug being administered to him without his knowledge or consent." Sadness drew
down the corners of his mouth. "But even afterward, when he had regained his self-control, he was never the same. Nor has he ever spoken of that time to
me or anyone among the HouseClan."
"I think she must have wounded his pride as much as his heart," I said softly.
"I must agree. And when Cherijo disappeared during the Jado Massacre, Xonea's path changed again," Xonal said. "Upon his return to Joren, my
ClanSon distanced himself from us. He rarely ate or slept, and he spent many weeks in solitude." He glanced at me. "That is not our way, Jarn. We
Jorenians share everything with our kin, even the worst of our sorrows. But Xonea lost all interest in family and work and life. If Reever had not convinced
him that Cherijo yet lived, I think my ClanSon would have abandoned his path altogether and embraced the stars. Now that you are found, well, perhaps
you understand why he behaves as he does."
I nodded. "Xonea will make sure that I never leave Joren again."
"Just so. But do not imagine that his ClanMother and I support his actions against you and Duncan. We believe that our ClanSon is wrong in what he
does." The ClanLeader touched the petals of a pale yellow flower blooming on a vine curled around the statue's base. "Were I to pluck this lovely thing
from its place and keep it cradled in my hands, it would be safe. I would ensure that nothing would ever harm it. Yet in time it would still wither and die. It
was not meant to be mine." He gazed at me. "As Cherijo--as you--were never meant to be Xonea's."
I felt some of the weight of worry ease inside me. "What can I do, ClanLeader?"
"My ClanSon knows well our modern laws, but has somewhat neglected studying our most ancient." He took the scroll case from his hip and handed it
to me. "This ruling, in particular, may be of some value to you."
"I will not know what it says," I advised him. "I cannot read Jorenian."
"The scroll contains the full text of a ruling from the days before the HouseClans united," he said, smiling at me. "It concerns the rights of an injured Torin
warrior who was saved by a Varena healer."
After leaving Marel at the Jorenian day school she now attended with Fasala and the other Torin children, Reever and I went to the HouseClan's main
medical facility. I looked back several times, wondering how quickly I might resolve the conflict with Xonea and return.
"Stop worrying about her," my husband said as he drove away. "Marel has many friends at school, and she enjoys her lessons. All of the instructors are
Torin, so if anyone threatens her--"
"Her teacher will eviscerate them with her bare hands, I know." I gave him an exasperated look. "My concern is not about her safety."
"Then what is?"
I couldn't say that every time I looked upon our child, I wondered if it might be the last. "Do you think this bounty being offered for us is another trick by
your friend to lure us away from Joren?"
"No. While you were gone this morning, I signaled some contacts I have." Reever's tone grew grim. "It would seem that my friend has taken his tricks
and left the quadrant."
"Then what he told us is true. There is someone else hunting us."
My husband nodded. "So it would seem. Whoever is offering the bounty has taken extraordinary measures to protect their identity; the Thekka used to
send that transmission was found dead shortly afterward."
"Dead?" I was astonished. "Murdered?"
"No, he was found to have died of natural causes," Reever said. "That is all my contacts have been able to discover."
The lack of information frustrated me. Also, the death of the Thekka sounded suspicious; as a doctor I knew of a hundred different ways to kill someone
and conceal the fact that they were murdered. A doctor. "Could it be Cherijo's creator who searches for us?"
"No. Cherijo and I both saw Joseph Grey Veil die on Terra." He hesitated, then added, "Jarn, if we remain on Joren, mercenaries will come for us. It is
possible that they will even join forces and attempt an invasion."
The thought of Joren being attacked--and the HouseClans' inevitable response--made me feel sick. "How can you know that?"
He glanced at me. "It is what I did to take Cherijo from the League."
All of his memories of that time came rushing back into my head, making it ache slightly. "Then perhaps we had better make some travel arrangements,
before you are forced to do the same for me."
Reever stopped the glidecar outside the main entrance to the medical facility. When I moved to climb out, he stopped me. "If we do not give Xonea
what he wants, he will find a lawful reason to attack Trellus. I know you're sympathetic, but we cannot sacrifice all those innocent people merely to protect
the one responsible from your ClanBrother's vengeance."
"If it becomes a choice between him and the colonists, I will tell Xonea everything he wants to know," I promised him. "But I think I can put a stop to all of
this today."
Just inside the entrance, the Torin's Senior Healer, a tall, dark-eyed Omorr male in a modified white and blue doctor's tunic, hopped back and forth on
his one leg. The white prehensile gildrells covering the lower half of his dark pink face were writhing, indicating he was agitated. As soon as he saw us,
his living beard twisted into bunched knots.
Xonea must be already here , I thought. "Good morning, Senior Healer."
"Would that I could say the same, Jarn." He used one of his three upper limbs to gesture toward the administrative area on the north side of the facility.
"Captain Torin has commandeered my offices and is even now searching through our database records. He also plans to interrogate me and the staff of
the post-op ward. Apparently, he believes that you knew that the explosive planted in the belly of your last surgical patient was put there to kill you, not her."
Xonea had been busy. "He said as much to me yesterday." At least my ClanBrother had not taken a different approach, or what I had planned might not
work. "Come. Reever will go and keep him from making a mess of things while you and I make rounds."
"Rounds?" Squilyp echoed at the same time Duncan said, "I will what?"
I regarded both of them. "Duncan, you would do better away from the patients in recovery; the smell of blood always makes you feel nauseated. Watch
Xonea, but allow him to find whatever he can. It will make him feel better to know he was right." I turned to my friend the Omorr. "You have some objection
to my performing rounds with you?"
"While we allow your ClanBrother to collect enough evidence to lawfully declare ClanKill on someone's world or species?" he snapped. "Why no, not at
all. What are the lives of a few million helpless beings in comparison to the twenty I have up on the ward?"
"Squilyp," I said, hanging on to my patience, "Xonea will do nothing, I promise. Now, I have been marooned for weeks on a dome colony with no
hospital and no doctors. When someone wasn't trying to kill me, they were making me operate with amalgam blades on patients in airlocks. Not to
mention what the giant slime-covered worm did to me and Reever."

Squilyp's dark eyes widened. "Giant? Slime-covered? What--"
"So now that we have returned to civilization," I said, ruthlessly interrupting him, "I would like to put these unhappy experiences behind me and do the
work that I was trained for in the proper environment. That is, if you have no obj ections, or believe, as Xonea does, that I am too mentally unbalanced to
make decisions without assistance."
"Why would he think . . . ?" The Omorr pressed one appendage end over his eyes, rubbing at them with the webbed membranes that served in place of
more humanoid fingers. "No. Don't tell me. I do not wish to know. We will make rounds." He eyed my husband. "And you--you will not get in Xonea's way or
send anyone to the trauma center, is that clear?"
Reever said something in Omorr that my vocollar would not translate, and walked away.
On the surgical ward, I reviewed each chart of the post-op patients while Squilyp checked their vitals, performed routine scans, and otherwise behaved
himself. We spent the most time with one patient, an older Jorenian male who had sustained multiple internal injuries when the loading platform where he
been working had collapsed, dumping nearly a ton of cargo containers on top of him.
"The organ repairs and bone grafts you performed appear to be healing, but his lung capacity remains diminished, and he sustains a fever despite the
antibiotic treatments." I paged through the chart until I found the latest respiratory scan and blood work. Even given his age and the severity of his injuries,
the results were not as they should have been. "You have him scheduled for an exploratory tomorrow?"
Squilyp nodded absently as he adjusted the patient's monitor leads. "I may have missed something during surgery."
I had operated alongside the Omorr often enough to know that he never missed anything. His meticulous methods and habits were perfection; he also
had a peculiar, natural aptitude for sensing and finding potential troubles during procedures that weren't readily apparent. The cause of the patient's poor
condition had to be from another source.
I regarded the Jorenian male, who was awake, although his eyes seemed unfocused. "Good morning, Palalo Torin. My name is Healer Jarn, and I must
talk to you about your accident. I know your throat has not healed enough yet for you to speak, so I will ask questions that require only a gesture of yes or
no as an answer. Can you do this for me?"
With his left hand he made a modified affirmative gesture.
"I thank you." I paged through his chart to the initial intake report. "You were unloading containers of agricultural equipment when the platform failed, is
this correct?"
He repeated the affirmative.
"Did the containers break open after they fell?" Palalo made a negative gesture. "Did they leak fuel or liquids?" Another no, but this time not as definite.
"Did anything come out of the containers that fell on you?" He hesitated, and then turned his hand over and spread his fingers in a gesture I did not
recognize.
"He is not certain," Squilyp said. "He lost consciousness during the platform failure, and short-term memory loss associated with head trauma is not
uncommon among Jorenians."
I took the Omorr's scanner and modified the settings before I passed it over the patient's chest. The resulting readings indicated elevated levels of
nitrogen. I had to increase the depth of the scan twice more before the device would identify the source: trace amounts of fungi, now lodged deep inside
small ruptures in the patient's lung tissue, which had become inflamed and closed over.
"You need not operate," I said to Squilyp, and handed him the scanner. "Fungus has infected his lungs, but we can clear them with a change in his
medication."
"He aspirated mold?"The Omorr consulted the chart. "There was no trace of this in his blood work."
"There wouldn't be," I said as I wrote up orders for the new meds and a deep-tissue breathing treatment. "This is a hybrid fungus, created specifically to
prepare soil for cultivation. It breaks down old plant matter and other solids while releasing nitrogen into the soil as a by-product."
Palalo's eyes widened, and he made a strong affirmative gesture.
"We should have detected trace amounts in his blood work," Squilyp said.
I shook my head. "Irrigation or immersion in liquid neutralizes and disperses the fungus; exposure to Palalo's bloodstream would have rendered it
untraceable."
The Omorr gave me an odd look. "How did it get so deep into his lung tissue?"
"It was also designed to plant itself." I called over a charge nurse to review the changes in the patient's treatment before I moved to the next bed.
Squilyp, however, kept watching me in an intent manner that made me feel somewhat uncomfortable.
"Don't you agree with my previous assessment?" I finally asked. "Or has my face become a new diagnostic tool?"
He seemed to choose his words carefully before he replied. "You used mold like the one infecting Palalo's lungs to treat the soil on Akkabarr?"
"There is no surface soil on my homeworld, only ice. The Iisleg do not farm; they hunt." I skimmed through the next patient's chart and noted that the
back injury the patient had sustained had responded well to corrective spinal therapy.
"How did you know what the mold was without checking the medical database?" Squilyp persisted.
"I treated several cases of the same type of infection on K-2. It's a common complaint among agri workers. They call it planting lung." I turned to the
patient, who was sitting up with an expectant look on her pretty face. "Good morning, Tabrea Torin. You appear to be ready for discharge."
The big female smiled. "That I am, Healer."
"Tabrea, your pardon," the Senior Healer said unexpectedly. "I must consult for a moment in private with Healer Torin." Squilyp took hold of my arm and
guided me away from the berth until we were out of hearing range. "Jarn, are you certain that you treated patients for the same type of mold infection that
Palalo has?"
"Of course I am." His apparent disbelief puzzled me. "The mold is a universal soil treatment used on hundreds of worlds. I've seen the same type of
infection in the ER dozens of times."
"Tell me the names of these patients."
"Their names?" Impatient now, I planted my hands on my hips. "Squilyp, why are you making such a big deal about this? If you don't agree with my
diagnosis--"
The Omorr interrupted me with a curt gesture. "You can't remember their names, can you?"
I thought for a moment. "No. I can't. Should I declare myself unfit now, before someone files a grievance against me?"
"You can't remember their names because you've never treated any patients with this mold infection," the Omorr said. "You've never been to K-2, Jarn."
I opened my mouth, closed it, and then exhaled slowly. "Of course, you are correct. I misspoke. Cherijo saw this type of mold-aspiration infection while
she worked on K-2. Does that satisfy you, or must I contact the colony and have someone pull the charts out of the archives to verify the facts?"
"Did Cherijo write about these patients in her journals?" he asked. When I shook my head, he added, "Then Reever must have shared with you his
memories of her treating patients with this condition."
"No, Reever never . . ." I trailed off as what he was saying sank in. "No. My husband did not witness the treatments. He would not have memories of
them." I stared at the Omorr. "I'm right about the source of the infection. Squilyp, I know I am."
"I have no doubt that you are," Squilyp said. "That is not what troubles me. Making a correct diagnosis is based on a combination of a physician's

education and personal experience. You have no education, and your practical medical experience is limited to treating the rebels on Akkabarr, the
Hsktskt on Vtaga, and some of the colonists on Trellus. Yet somehow you are able to retrieve very specific information about these cases on K-2. Only
Cherijo had knowledge of them."
Anger swelled inside me. This was my body and my life. I was not surrendering them to anyone, even the woman who had owned them first. "Cherijo
and her knowledge died on Akkabarr."
"The brain damage from her head wounds in effect wiped her mind clean," Squilyp said, as if correcting me. "Her body survived, and the tissue
destroyed in the hippocampus as well as the entorhinal, perirhinal, and para-hippocampal nodes fully regenerated. You are the ego and personality that
developed after the body's original mind was destroyed. If you can remember Cherijo's experiences, her patients . . ."
I made a rolling motion with my hand. "What?"
He glanced down and then back up at my face. "We must discover how you are able to access these memories."
"Senior Healer, Healer Jarn." A distressed-looking nurse from one of the lower wards rushed toward us. "Captain Xonea Torin and a detachment of
militia are on the recovery ward. They wish to question one of our patients." She glanced at me. "Your bondmate is there, too, Healer. He says they may
not."
Squilyp and I accompanied the nurse to the rehabilitation ward, which was occupied by patients who needed extensive physical or mental therapeutic
treatment. I saw Xonea's men gathered outside one of the private rooms. They did not have their weapons drawn, but their expressions indicated that
might soon change. The only sound I heard were two male voices coming from the room: Reever and Xonea, arguing in Jorenian.
"He never listens to me," I muttered as I stalked toward the room. Squilyp followed, and Xonea's men wisely moved out of our way.
Inside the patient room were my husband and my ClanBrother, standing on opposite sides of the berth occupied by the Jorenian female from whom I
had removed the arutanium grenade.
"You will step aside, Linguist," Xonea was saying to my husband, "or I will have you detained."
"You may try," Reever replied.
I glanced at the patient, who had her berth linens pulled up around her neck and her eyes tightly closed. She appeared utterly petrified of both men--not
that I blamed her. I doubt I would have enjoyed waking up to find a Jorenian warrior and a grim-faced Terran hurling words at each other over me.
"I don't recall giving either of you permission to speak to my patient," I said as I went to the end of the berth and picked up her chart. "Good morning,
lady," I said to her, smiling as she opened her eyes. "I apologize for this intrusion. Generally we do not consider terrorizing patients as an acceptable form
of therapeutic postoperative treatment."
"Healer," she said, her voice laced with panic. "I do not remember what I have done, but I would ask pardon for it."
"Up until this moment, you have been recovering from major gastrointestinal reconstructive surgery," I informed her. "For that, you need never
apologize." I turned to Xonea. "Captain Torin. Unless you acquired a medical degree with a specialty in gastrointestinal surgery while Reever and I were
on Trellus, you have no business being in this room."
Xonea scowled. "Cherijo, as your ClanBrother I have the right--"
"Forgive me, was I not specific enough? This is a patient's private room. You are not a physician or a therapist." I pointed toward the entry panel. "Get.
Out."
He glared down at me, his shoulders rigid with indignation, and then he strode out of the room.
I regarded my husband. "I suppose you did not signal me about this before confronting Xonea because your wristcom is malfunctioning."
"Something like that," Reever agreed.
Squilyp hopped over to the patient's berth. "Would you excuse us, lady?" When she made a small, tight, affirmative gesture, the Senior Healer led us
into the adjoining treatment room and closed the door panel."There is something I have to tell you before this goes any further."
"You are not allowing Xonea to question my patient," I told him.
"Of course I wouldn't," he snapped. "It wouldn't do any good if he did."
I closed my eyes briefly. "What is it?"
"In light of the patient's amnesia, I ordered a full neurological workup," Squilyp said. "Whoever planted the grenade in her body also injected her with a
drug we have still not identified. Here are her latest brain scans and the neurologist's prognosis." He handed me a datapad.
Reever also looked at the data and read the report summary before he looked at Squilyp. "Have you told her?"
"Yes, after I consulted with several other neurologists," the Omorr said, and saw my scowl. "Jarn, she deserved to know the truth."
"The truth might have waited until her body healed." I had not had time to perform a proper visual assessment, or I would have checked her neck for her
Clan Symbol, a small black birthmark that in normal Jorenians indicated genetic lineage. "Her Clan Symbol remains indistinct?"
"Yes. We have sent out signals to all of the HouseClans, along with a detailed physical description and images of her features, but none have claimed
her." Squilyp hesitated before adding, "Her DNA does not match any known HouseClan profile."
"Run the tests again," I said, "because that isn't possible."
"Were she born on Joren, I would agree with you." The Omorr's gildrells undulated with agitation. "She has the physical appearance of an adult
Jorenian female, but there are some cellular anomalies in her tissues and fluids that are not inherent to the species."
"She may have been alterformed specifically to infiltrate Joren," Reever suggested.
The Omorr shook his head. "There are always signs on the cellular level of genetic tampering: strand splicing, chromosome deformation, and the like. I
did not detect any of them. Once I could not match her DNA profile to any HouseClan, I thought she might be the product of forced breeding by a slaver."
"No freeborn Jorenian would reproduce in captivity," Reever said."They do not tolerate enslavement. Like the Hsktskt, they commit suicide at the first
opportunity."
I recalled Marel's pictures of Kol and Jory. "Not all. The members of HouseClan Kalea are the children of enslaved Jorenian females who were forcebred by their owners. Perhaps something like that happened to her Jorenian parent."
"Whatever her origins, this female is in many ways like a newborn infant--much like you were, Jarn, when you first came to consciousness on Akkabarr,"
Squilyp tagged on. "Xonea can question her all he likes, but she will be unable to provide him answers. We believe the drug administered to her
effectively destroyed her memory center."
"Are all forms of amnesia considered mental defects on this world?" I asked.
The Omorr shook his head. "Not unless it is accompanied by delusions or psychosis."
"It's nice to know that I'm either delusional or psychotic." The time had come for me to put an end to Xonea's scheming. "Here." I took the scroll case out
of my tunic and offered it to my husband. "It's written in old Jorenian script. If need be, can you read it?"
"Yes." Reever removed the scroll and unrolled it, his eyes skimming over it. "An interesting document." He replaced it in the case and met my gaze. "I
will not ask where you obtained this."
I nodded. "That would be best."
The three of us returned to the patient's room. The female's eyes darted toward the open panel leading out to the corridor before she moved to sit up.

The motion made her grimace.
"The exercises are helping, but sometimes my stomach yet pains me," she said almost apologetically. "The nurse says it will be some days before I
may rise from the berth."
I saw Xonea watching us. "Shut the door panel, Squilyp." I made my voice loud enough for him to overhear. "The lady deserves privacy for her exam."
"I do not think I am well enough to walk." The patient made a gesture toward the corridor. "But Captain Torin said he would provide me with a glidechair
when he transports me to security headquarters."
"Captain Torin is not taking you anywhere," I informed her. "My name is Jarn, and I am the surgeon who removed the grenade from your abdomen. I
would have first obtained your consent, but your delirium made that impossible. Also, aside from the obvious risk of explosion, the device was leaking
trace amounts of arutanium, which would have quickly poisoned you. I had no choice but to immediately operate."
"So I have been told." She gave me a tentative smile. "The Senior Healer has said that I would be embracing the stars now, if not for you."
"I regret that we cannot do more about your memory loss." No, I didn't, as she might be the only thing to stop Xonea from wreaking havoc in my name.
"Perhaps someday a new treatment will be found for your condition."
"It frightens me to think about it," the patient admitted. "I cannot fathom why someone would do such a thing to me."
"We believe that you were used in order to get to me," I said. "The explosive planted in your body was designed to kill any Terran who touched it. But
the one who did this to you knew that I would recognize the device, and that I had the skill to remove it safely."
She frowned. "Then why was this done, Healer?"
"The goal was not to kill me, but to force me to leave Joren." I saw her confused expression. "The circumstances are difficult to explain. It was a
complicated situation that has now been resolved."
"I am happy to hear it." She reached out and touched my forearm briefly."I am also grateful for my life, Healer. Anything I have is yours."
"I must ask you to do something for me," I told her. "When Captain Torin and his men return to this room, I want you to shield someone."
"I may only do that if someone has threatened to harm me or one of my kin in my presence." She seemed bewildered now. "No one has done so, and
the Senior Healer is unable to determine who my kin are. Whom shall I shield?"
"The male who implanted the grenade in your body." I sat down on the edge of her berth and gazed into her shocked eyes. "I know what he did to you
was a terrible thing, lady, but I assure you, he has been made to pay for his crimes." When she didn't respond, I added, "I would not ask this of you, but
more than what was done to you is at stake. Many innocent lives are in danger. Your forgiveness may be the only thing that can protect them."
"The one who did this might have easily killed us both." She hesitated and placed a hand over her abdomen. "You saved my life, Healer. If it is your wish
to have his life in return, then I make it yours."
"I thank you, lady." I nodded to Squilyp, who called Xonea and his men back into the room. "Captain, by operating on this female, I saved her life. DNA
tests indicate that she does not belong to the Torin. Do you dispute either of these facts?"
He peered down at me. "Why should I?"
"If you do not understand the question," I advised him, "I will request another representative from HouseClan Torin to attend me."
His normally elegant hands made choppy motions as he spoke, betraying the anger underlying his impatience. "I do not dispute that you saved her life
or that she belongs to another House. That does not prevent me from questioning her."
"No, it doesn't. But first the lady has something she wishes to say before witnesses." I turned to the patient. "Madam?"
She glanced at Xonea before she said, "I shield the one responsible for implanting the grenade in my body."
"How know you to . . . ?" Xonea's face darkened as he realized the implications of her statement, and swung around to glare at me. "This female may
shield whom-ever she wishes, Cherijo, but it changes nothing."
"Actually, it does," I said, stepping between him and the berth. "By shielding her attacker, my patient has forgiven the harm done to her and, by
extension, the indirect threat made to me."
"There was nothing indirect about that grenade," he grated. "It was designed to explode the moment a Terran touched it. You were the only Terran
surgeon on Joren. Do not bother to deny it."
"I have no intention of doing so," I assured him. "But I recognized the device and took care not to touch it while I was operating. Thus the grenade was a
threat only to her life, not mine."
"There were other patients present," he said. "Nurses."
"The grenade had a contact trigger," I reminded him. "By the time I took the lady into surgery, which is the time when the device presented the threat, the
facility had been evacuated. I used only a drone assistant." I smiled at him. "Try again."
"She was sent here to assassinate you," Xonea shouted.
I shrugged. "Whoever made her into a bomb has been shielded. Everything related to that act is irrelevant now."
"The lady brought a bomb into this facility," my ClanBrother sneered. "Willingly or not, that was a direct threat. You are not permitted to shield her without
my consent. So I can just as easily declare her my ClanKill."
The Omorr hopped over to stand beside me. "You will first have to claw your way through me."
"No, Senior Healer, that won't be necessary," I said softly. "By law, any injured warrior treated by the healer of another HouseClan is shielded for the
duration of their treatment and recovery. No word, intent, or act on their part may be declared as a threat to the House."
Xonea looked ready to declare everyone in the room his ClanKill, starting with me. "You invoke the law of mercy?"
"I do. I even brought a copy of it for consultation purposes." I gestured toward my husband. "Duncan will read it out loud to you, if you like."
"I know the law, and it grants only a temporary reprieve." Xonea spat the words as he would a curse. "I can wait until she recovers."
"Then you will spend a lifetime waiting, Captain," I said. "The lady will never recover completely from all of her injuries."
"Drug-induced brain damage has caused her permanent memory loss." Squilyp handed him the datapad with the neurologist's report. "Read for
yourself."
Silence fell over the room, growing thick and uncomfortable as Xonea skimmed through the data. The datapad went flying across the patient's room,
smashing into the wall and dropping in pieces on the floor. The patient's eyes widened, and she yanked her linens up over her head. Squilyp went to the
wall panel and signaled security.
Reever, his face blank and his eyes so dark they looked black, took a step toward Xonea.
I put a hand on my husband's arm. "No." I watched my ClanBrother's face. "Wait."
Xonea regarded me as he spoke to his men. "We are finished here. Return to your stations."
I felt a twinge of sympathy for him. "Xonea, I know you were only trying to do what you thought was best. But your efforts on my behalf are not
necessary."
"Your behalf?" His tone may have been soft, but a lethal rage filled his eyes. "I have done nothing for you."
I gestured from the patient to the shattered datapad. "Then why all this?"
"Your neurologist is wrong, Omorr. Nothing lost is gone forever." Xonea looked down his nose at me. "You think because I do not use your name that I
do not know who you are? I know. You are not Cherijo. You may have her skills, her voice, even her bondmate and child, but you can never be Cherijo."

"No." My spine turned to ice. "I can't."
He leaned down, his voice going soft. "Do not become too comfortable in that skin, Akkabarran. Someday my ClanSister will return to us, and when she
does"--he looked from my head to my footgear and back again--"she will take back all that you have stolen from her."

Three
Xonea's prediction sat like tainted food in my belly for some time after we left the medical facility. I had long wished him to acknowledge that I was not
Cherijo, but now that he had, I could take no pleasure in it.
He had been angry; I knew that. His reason for saying such things to me may have been only to strike back at me for depriving him of revenge. Still, the
blow was a heavy one. To be called an Akkabarran, as if I didn't deserve my name, was surely the worst. Since leaving my homeworld, I had struggled
daily to prove my worth. I did the work and adjusted as best I could to ensleg ways. I believed that I had helped those in need.
In Xonea's eyes, however, it meant nothing. Just like me.
Despite my own curdled feelings, at least now I grasped the cause of all of his maneuverings. He was not simply angry at us for leaving Joren. He saw
me as an intruder, a thief who had stolen what did not belong to me. He wanted me gone and Cherijo returned. Which was the same as wishing me dead.
Reever said nothing about Xonea or his ugly behavior as we went to the HouseClan pavilion to return the scroll to Xonal, but I sensed his concern
hovering between us, silent and watchful.
I stopped in the courtyard and turned to him. "Stop it."
His eyebrows rose. "Stop what?"
"You are watching me out of the corner of your eye, waiting for me to have some sort of hysterical female reaction," I told him. "I was an Iisleg woman. A
skela. I have been despised for simply breathing. I have been shot, beaten, starved, and left for dead. I have walked the ice fields and dragged the dying
from them as Toskald ordnance exploded all around me. Believe me when I say that some harsh words thrown at me by one angry man will not make me
collapse."
"I would, but I have this one problem." He tucked the scroll case under the belt of his tunic and then framed my face with his scarred hands. "I love you."
"Well." I rested my hands against his chest. Once I believed that he had loved only my body, as it was all he had left of his dead wife. Now I knew better.
"I suppose I could tolerate it a little longer," I said gruffly.
"Xonea does not know you," Reever continued, stroking the curves of my cheeks with his thumbs before taking his hands away. "He looks at you, but he
sees Cherijo."
I recalled the set of the Jorenian's face, and the savageness in his voice as he lashed out at me. You can never be Cherijo. "Evidently, he did not see
her today."
"Jarn, Duncan." Darea entered the courtyard and crossed it to join us. She also carried a cylindrical case, but this one had been fashioned of clear plas
and held other, marked rolls of plas inside. "Do you have a moment? My ClanDaughter discovered something quite interesting about the scan you sent
us."
We went to a table and sat down together. Darea removed several rolled sheets of marked plas from her case and spread out one of them onto the
surface of the table.
"Fasala studied the copy of the original map, but she was not able to decipher some of the Aksellan symbols," Darea said. "Over the centuries, Joren
has collected an extensive star chart library, with records from all known space-traveling species. I scanned the map's symbols and input them for
comparison, but they are not recorded in our database."
"The Trellusan who gave us the map claimed it was very old," I told her. "Perhaps they predate your records."
"We believe the same--and there is more. As Fasala could not use the symbols, she filtered the scanned image to show only the star systems and the
Aksellan's marked travel routes. Here is what the map looks like without the symbols." Darea pointed to circles and lines on the transparency. "Salo has
traveled through some of this region, so he was the first to notice the mistakes in the route patterns."
I knew little of star charts, but Reever had extensive pilot training and had traveled a great deal on his own. "What is wrong with them?"
Reever frowned as he leaned over to inspect the plas. "The lanes are too long and convoluted."
Darea smiled at him. "My bondmate was not so diplomatic; he called them utterly ridiculous. He said no ship's captain would waste the time or
resources by following such courses over more direct routes. But to be certain, we checked each course on the map against the trade routes presently
being used in those systems. The lanes the Aksellans marked on this map are three to five times longer."
"Perhaps it was for trade purposes," I suggested. "They may have diverted their ships to worlds in need of the ore they mined."
"These routes took the ships away from the most populated planetary systems," my husband murmured as he studied the transparency. "The Aksellans
were diverting their ships away from these worlds. It may have been to protect from raiders the ore they were transporting."
Darea nodded. "I, too, thought they may have taken the routes as a security tactic, until Salo began checking the symbols I had removed." Darea
unrolled another sheet of plas and placed it over the transparency of the planets and shipping routes. "The systems they avoided had two things in
common: inhabited worlds, and a dark triangle marking all of them. But we do not know what that symbol means."
"We do." Troubled now, I met my husband's gaze over the map. "The miners were avoiding worlds with deposits of black crystal."
My former self had encountered the black crystal several times in her past. She had found it to be the cause of diseases on Catopsa, Taercal, and
Oenrall. I, too, had witnessed its effects on Trellus, when it mesmerized Reever. But we knew that nearly all of the worlds presently infected with the mineral
were not even aware of its existence, or how it might be affecting their population. "How could they have known it was there so long ago?"
"The Aksellans have always been a highly intelligent species, but I do not believe these map makers knew of the crystal," Xonal said, startling me as he
appeared at my side and leaned over to inspect the transparency. "According to legend, they were far more reserved than their modern descendents.
They avoided other sentient species, and mined only unclaimed comets, asteroids, and meteor fields." When we all looked at him, he moved his hands in
an easy gesture. "As a youth I was as interested in geology as well as exploring space. I spent two years serving as chief navigator on an Aksellan ore
hauler."
Reever straightened. "You think that they avoided these worlds because they were inhabited, not because they have deposits of black crystal."
"This symbol here." Xonal traced one of the dark triangles. "It is a greatly simplified form of two modern Aksellan glyphs. One represents the number
three, the other means 'outsider.' Used together, they translate to threat."
That made more sense, until I considered another interpretation. The black crystal affected only living, sentient beings. If it was as lethal as my
surrogate mother had promised, it might infect worlds only where it could find some prey. "Are there any inhabited worlds on the map that are not marked
with the dark triangle?"
Reever consulted the transparency. "Yes. Joren, Akkabarr, and oKia, in the Saraced system." He pointed to each planet.
Joren was on one end of the map, Akkabarr in the center, and oKia on the opposite. "Is it possible that at the time this map was made, the black crystal
had not yet reached these three worlds?"
"The mother's cloak has always protected our planet," Xonal said. At my surprised look, he added, "Her cloak is a thick layer of volatile gases in the
upper atmosphere. Free-falling minerals cause them to ignite, so that nothing smaller than a large asteroid could pass unprotected through the layer

successfully."
"Akkabarr's kvinka--the storm currents enveloping the planet--do the same for the Iisleg," I said. "What of oKia?"
"I cannot say if they have escaped the black crystal, but it seems unlikely," the ClanLeader told me. "It is an ordinary, cold-climate world with no unusual
atmospheric conditions. The dominant species, the oKiaf, are sentient tribal hunters, much like our ancestors were."
"Are they primitive?" If they were, that would present different problems.
"Not since the turn of the century," Reever said. "The League recruited oKia to join them by offering advanced technology in exchange for the service of
their trackers in the military. oKiaf were said to be the best troop marshals in the quadrant."
I used my datapad to access Joren's planetary database, but it listed only a scant amount of statistics on its solar system and planetary surface
conditions. "There is hardly any information recorded about this world."
"Few sojourn to oKia or any of the planets within the Saraced system," Darea admitted. "That region of space is too remote and sparsely populated to
tempt many traders, and too ordinary to lure our explorers. After Skart was destroyed during the war, many have avoided it."
"oKia recently resigned from the League, canceled the contracts of all their people serving in the military, and recalled them to the homeworld," Reever
said. "They also banned all contact with offworlders."
"They follow Joren's path." Darea exchanged a wry look with Xonal before she added, "They are not the first to break with the League since the war,
Duncan. After Raktar Teulon revealed the truth about the Jado Massacre, and how the League's finest officers were responsible for causing it, many
worlds have chosen to do the same."
"I would agree with your theory," my husband said, "but they have banned contact with all other beings, not merely the League. No member of any
species is permitted to travel through their space."
"During the war, the Hsktskt destroyed Skart, one of the neighboring worlds in oKia's solar system," Darea said. "That may have decided everything for
the oKiaf."
"If their planet still remains free of the black crystal, we must find the reason for it." A sojourn to the Saraced system might also keep the mercenaries
hunting us from invading Joren, and give Reever time to discover who was offering the bounty for us and why. "We should go to oKia and survey it, even if
we must do so from orbit."
"The oKiaf will have something to say about that, I think," Xonal said. "As will Xonea."
My ClanBrother's desire to keep me on Joren was going to be a problem. "We can't fly a scout to the opposite side of the galaxy. We will need a vessel
capable of interstellar flight." I regarded the ClanLeader. "Perhaps you could persuade Captain Torin to permit us to use the Sunlace as transport for the
expedition."
"I believe that can be easily arranged." He smiled, made an affectionate gesture and left us.
Darea gave me a shrewd look. "I think you are not so interested in traveling to oKia as you are in leaving Joren."
"I do wish to know if the oKiaf have something that has prevented the black crystal from infecting their world," I said. "Whatever has spared them could
prove invaluable to removing the crystal from other worlds it has already infected."
"But after all that Xonea has done to spy on you and Reever, why would you wish him to transport the expedition?" Darea asked, perplexed.
"My ClanBrother has done all these things so that he can keep me here on Joren," I said. "What better justice is there than choosing him to be the one
who must transport me off the planet?"
After our experience with Alek Davidov forcing us to crash-land on Trellus, and now this new bounty being offered for our capture, I knew we would once
more have to leave our daughter behind on Joren. The League still did not know of her existence, and for her sake, we intended to keep it that way. Yet the
thought of being separated from Marel again, so soon after our reunion, made slow, sharp daggers of guilt stab into me.
"A proper mother does not abandon her child," I muttered as Reever and I cleared the servers from our evening meal interval. I glanced over at the
cleansing unit, where our daughter was merrily playing in her bath. "Especially a girl child she barely knows. Yet no matter how I try, this is all I seem to do
to the girl."
"Would you rather stay behind with her?" my husband asked as he rinsed the plates. "I can sojourn to oKia alone."
"The last time we were separated, I died, and you nearly cracked up," I reminded him. "I think you and I had better stick to one another . . . like . . ." I
stopped as I realized what I had been saying. "Glue."
"Jarn?"
I grabbed a handful of his tunic and twisted my hand in it as I fought back the anger and fear. "What is that word?" I said through clenched teeth. "What
is glue?"
"An adhesive form of plas, used to hold separate things together, or repair them when they split or break apart." He covered the fist I had wound in his
tunic with a gentle hand. "Think, Wife. You must have had something like glue on Akkabarr."
I backed away from him and went to the cleanser, breathing in deeply. As I picked up a server, I scrabbled through the words whirling in my head.
He came up behind me. "Jarn, you need not--"
"Yes," I said, almost shouting. Quickly, I lowered my voice. "Yes, we did have something. Joining paste. Boil ptar claws for three days and let the liquid
cool. We use it to fix our sleds. We did."
"It's growing worse, isn't it?" he asked quietly.
"No. I am well." The server in my hand cracked, and the sonic jet turned pink. "Ignore that."
Reever took hold of my wrist and turned it to see the gash across my palm. The bleeding stopped a moment later and the wound seemed to shrivel in
on itself.
His eyes gazed into mine. "You are healing much faster than Cherijo could."
"Candy is dandy, but liquor is quicker," I muttered under my breath. I watched the stream from the cleansing unit turn clear again. "I don't know what
those words mean, either, Duncan."
"It is only a joke I told once," he assured me.
"You lie." I knew his memories, and those words were not his. "You never tell jokes."
The words--the joke--had come from Cherijo. I knew it as well as he did. But she had never spoken them to him. These were words they had never once
shared.
Reever's hands cradled mine. "We will go and see Squilyp in the morning."
"No. He will say the same thing as before. Amnesia victims routinely have anxiety attacks. I must have absorbed the words from another source of
which I was not aware, or that I no longer recall." I curled my fingers over the laceration that was no longer there. I wanted to weep. I wanted to strike the
man I loved in the face.
"Mama?" Marel called from the tub cleanser. "Why did you shout at Daddy?"
"I am telling him a joke." I carefully picked up the pieces of the broken server and put them into the disposal unit. Without looking at Reever, I went over
to help our daughter out of the tub. "Duncan, how quickly can you teach me StanTerran?"

"I don't know," he said. "The Terran you speak is very old and corrupted by Toskald. A purer form may confuse you. Jarn, what happened just now--"
I rubbed a drying linen over Marel's damp curls. "It was nothing," I lied. "As Squilyp says, a momentary thought disorder. But I would know the meaning
of all the words that come out of my mouth."
"I can teach you Terran, Mama," my daughter said as she pulled on her night garments. "I have all the language files on my datapad. We can read
together every night and in the mornings before I go to school."
"It will have to wait for now."This was the perfect time to tell her about the expedition, but instead I crouched down and took her into my arms. "Daddy
must tell us a sleeping-time story."
We did not hurry through our evening rituals, and by the time Reever finished telling a strange but stirring tale about a young shepherd who had used his
wits to slay an armored giant, Marel had fallen asleep in my arms. I breathed in the soft, sweet scent of her as I covered her with her bed linens. I wanted
to lie on the floor and sleep beside her, but I made myself turn down the emitters before I walked out of her room.
Long fingers laced through mine, tugging me back against my husband's chest. Candy is a sweet-tasting treat favored by Terran children. There is no

word in Iisleg for it because your people do not have the means to make treats or sugars. Liquor is a liquid once made of fermented botanicals. The
alcohol produced by the fermentation made it an effective intoxicant. It is synthesized now. I did spend four years in a boarding school on Terra. I must
have heard the words during that time.
My shoulders stiffened. Your lies are not going to make this any better. They were her words, not yours, and I remembered them.
Very well. We will talk about something else. Or do something else. He kissed the tip of my nose. "Do you have any suggestions?"
I could not dismiss it so easily; I felt as if I couldn't breathe.
"I need air," I told him, pulling away and crossing the room to the courtyard access panel. "I'm going for a walk." When he began to follow me, I turned
and held up one hand. "By myself. Please."
He studied my face. "As you like."
The nights on Joren were cool and dry, causing the indigenous flora to close their blossoms during the darkness. That cleared some of their perfume
from the air and made it seem less alien to my nose. As I walked the pathways through the courtyard, I still felt trapped.
I did not belong here, on this world, in this pavilion, inside this body. She had been born to do all of these things, not me. Xonea was right in that sense. I
had not meant to, but I had stolen everything from Cherijo: my body, my husband, my child, my life. None of them belonged to me.
Was Cherijo still somewhere inside my mind? Had her personality somehow survived the crash and the brain damage? Was she returning to this body,
to take back what was hers?
I walked blindly for a time, until I found myself standing in a field of waist-high, silvery yiborra grass. Above my head the stars glittered, a hundred
thousand tiny, hostile eyes.
I did not mind being alone. I had spent years in silent solitude on Akkabarr, living in my head as I came to know who and what I was. My sister skelas'
superstitions made them believe my survival meant I was touched by the goddess, and so they had cared for me while I ignored them. They had loved me
in their way, but I had never truly cared for them. I remembered the time when I had considered walking out on the ice in the night, when it was too
dangerous and cold to cross, simply so I could escape their noise, their smell, and the shadows in their eyes.
Among the ensleg, I had done little better. Reever loved me, but who was I for him to love? Who was I to be a mother to the child Cherijo had made with
him? A presence, a thing that had filled a void.
I could not even be properly called a person. I had not been born. I had no parents, no family, no one to call my true kin. If I had not awoken in Cherijo's
body, no one would have cared what happened to me. If not for the work she had begun, and that I was obliged to carry on, I would be useless, pointless.
Wasted.
"When Kao Torin died, a part of Cherijo died with him," Reever said as he came to stand beside me. "That did not happen to me when she died."
I glanced back at the pavilion. We were too far from the child out here. "Marel is alone. We should go back."
"Fasala was happy to come and stay with our daughter for a few hours." He put his arm around me. "You dislike it when I speak of Cherijo's first love."
No, I didn't. Sometimes hearing his name made my chest hurt. "He is dead. We do not speak of the dead on Akkabarr."
"Indulge me this once." His hand stroked the crown of my head. "Do you know why Cherijo's death did not affect me as Kao's passing did her?"
"You didn't learn of it until several years after it happened." I shifted my shoulders. "When you did, you had me to take her place immediately."
"Is that what you think?" Reever turned me to face him. "I became Cherijo's lover, and eventually her husband, so that I might take Kao's place in her
heart, as I had promised him that I would. But I could not."
"She was an idiot to refuse your love," I assured him.
"It had nothing to do with her. I have told you that I loved her, but the truth is that I did not. I could not." He reached out and caressed the tips of the yiborra
with his palm. "When Cherijo and I became lovers, I still had no human emotions. I did not know what it was to love."
"Now you will tell me that you know how I feel and that this is why we love and are meant to be together," I predicted, scowling up at the stars. "You don't
have to say it, Duncan. You're wrong. You do have emotions. I have felt them. I know you love me."
"I did not have these emotions for her," he said slowly, as if speaking the words were painful. "I knew I had to be with her--I sensed that she might in
some fashion be the most important person that I would ever meet--but she was not my first love here." He tapped his chest. "You are."
"What did you feel for her, if not love?" I demanded, unwilling to believe him.
The corner of his mouth curled. "Curiosity. Desire, certainly. All I wanted was her, but I didn't understand why. I used my promise to Kao Torin as an
excuse to keep her with me so I could fathom it. Near the end, I thought it was to prepare me to be a father to Marel. That I was never meant to love
Cherijo, but simply learn from her how to be a parent to our daughter. I was wrong about that, as well."
I swallowed against the tightness in my throat. "Do you know now?" He nodded. "Then why? Why stay with her if you knew you didn't love her? Why did
you spend all that time searching for her?"
"Jarn." He put his hand to my cheek. "It was you. All this time with her, I was waiting for you."
I saw the truth in his eyes, and relief and shame took turns choking me until I began to weep. I buried my face against his tunic, but the garment didn't
muffle the sound of my sobs very well. Reever put his arms around me as my knees buckled, and knelt with me in the soft, cool grass.
For me, the safest place in the universe was in my husband's arms, and this night I reveled in it. I flung away my fear and held on to what was mine. My
husband, my beloved. He belonged to me and only me now.
Flickers of light danced against my closed eyes, and I looked through the blur of my tears to see long ribbons of luminous color weaving all around us.
"Wind dancers," Duncan murmured against my hair. "They're attracted to our body heat."
I lifted my hand, and a length of iridescent blue landed on my palm, curling around it briefly before its glow intensified and it fluttered away, leaving a cool
sensation on my skin. Nothing on my homeworld compared to it, but something as delicate and beautiful as this would have been ripped to pieces by
Akkabarr's lethal winds. "It steals warmth from other creatures."
"Only a little." His hands brushed the hair back from my face, and his mouth touched the curve of my cheek. "Are you cold?"
That startled a laugh out of me. I had survived for years on a world that never knew a single moment as warm as this night. "I think not." I put my mouth to

his, tasting him slowly before I pulled him down into the grass.
A rainbow of light settled around us, reflecting off the shining blades of the yiborra as we tugged off the garments separating our skins. I had never
coupled with Duncan in such an open place, and feeling the air and the cool flutter of the dancers touching my body aroused me almost as much as his
hands.
It was my habit to let Duncan do as he pleased with my body, as everything he did gave me great pleasure. Tonight I felt something shift deep inside
me, something that wanted to be more than a woman of the Iisleg.
I pushed my husband onto his back and straddled him, pressing his shoulders into the grass as I bent and used my mouth on his neck, shoulders, and
chest. When I seized a handful of his hair and brought his face to mine, he lifted my hips and guided me over him. I sank down, taking him as he had so
often taken me, with all the passion I felt. I could not feel empty or alone, not with our bodies like this. Not in this.
Wind dancers twined their sinuous bodies in my hair as I moved, caressing the thickness of him with my softness. He pushed deeper, groaning as he
filled me, and I clamped down on him, squeezing him in a tight, ceaseless rhythm.
"I love this," I whispered, pressing my fingers to his lips when he would have spoken. "No. Only feel it, Duncan. Feel what we are together."
I kept him a prisoner of my body, and rode him that way until his fingers dug into my hips and his eyes became as intent and blue as a jlorra's.
"Jarn." His muscles shook, so eager to spill himself inside me, yet somehow he held back. "I will not go over. Not without you."
The thing inside me shattered as I rolled, and the single thrust of his body into mine brought us both to the very brink. Duncan kept his eyes open as he
lowered his mouth to mine in a kiss so soft and tender that I lost myself to it. Then the pleasure brought me back, into his heat and his eyes and the
blessed release we found together.
We lay in the grass as the wind cooled our skins and the glowing dancers rose all around us and drifted away. I listened to the frantic pounding of
Duncan's heart gradually slow to a smooth, comforting pulse against my cheek.
"Do you think she would hate us?" I heard myself ask. "For what we have together?"
The hand stroking my back paused, then resumed its soothing motion. "Cherijo hated many things. Ignorance, incompetence. Bigotry, slavery, and war.
She hated them with all of her heart." He pulled me closer. "But not love. Never love."

Four
We went back to our quarters and I slept in Duncan's arms, better than I had in weeks.The next morning I sent my husband off to take Marel to school, and
went to meet Squilyp at his private lab. We'd arranged it the day before, officially to discuss the results of the tests he had performed on Reever's most
recent tissue and blood samples.
Unofficially, we needed to talk about a lot of things.
"Wait, there is something on you." Squilyp stopped me just outside the lab and used a gildrell to pluck something from my hair. He showed me a
fragment of yiborra grass. "Have you been rolling in the grass, Doctor?"
"Only once or twice. Reever and I were too busy doing other things." I took the bit of grass and tucked it into my tunic pocket. "Speaking of mates, have
you signaled Garphawayn lately?"
"I signal my mate each night, thank you. If I did not, she promised to separate my head from my shoulders when she and our sons return to Joren." He
keyed in the access code to the lab, which he had built and designed for his personal use, and led me inside.
"They're coming back from Omorr to visit you?" This was news to me.
"They will come back to live here with me. I have been offered a position as Chief Medical Adviser to the Ruling Council, and I intend to accept." Squilyp
went to his central control panel and turned on several emitters, illuminating the interior. "We have already been granted permanent residential status. All
my mate needs to do is decide among which HouseClan she wishes to live. It would be more convenient to reside with the Adan, but she has become
very attached to the Torin."
I had been planning to ask Squilyp to join the expedition to oKia, but now I hesitated. As much as I wanted the Omorr in Medical, this position sounded
far more important. Squilyp also had a rather demanding wife, to whom he was utterly devoted, as well as two young sons he adored. It would be selfish to
expect him to drop everything to jaunt to oKia with us.
"What about your families on the homeworld?" I knew the Omorr lived almost as closely as the Jorenians did. "Do they approve?"
"My family acknowledges the honor of the position. Her family"--he rolled his dark eyes--"is displeased by our decision to raise the twins away from
Omorr, but I think they will come to accept it. Thus far they have made only the token arguments."
I went to examine an interesting-looking experiment in progress. "They're more afraid of her than you."
"Everyone is," he agreed. "Don't open that."
I studied the contents of the culture dishes. "What is it?"
"My latest batch of epithelial scaffolding cells." Squilyp hopped over and peered into the culture incubator I was inspecting. "As I suspected. They're not
bonding with Reever's tissue samples. I'm afraid that so far, nothing has."
"If the chameleons don't bond with host cells, then how can they repair and replace damaged organs?"
"When I discern that," the Omorr said, "I will be the wealthiest surgeon in the galaxy." He saw my expression and sniffed. "Cherijo was never so gullible
as you. The reason I commissioned this lab was to protect my research. No one can know about Duncan's condition, Jarn. If I can discover how to implant
chameleon cells in another host body, they could be used by less virtuous researchers to create virtually indestructible armies."
We went over the test results, which had yielded little new information. Squilyp had performed a comprehensive series of scans on the chameleon cells
I had harvested from Reever's kidneys and liver, but they did not respond or behave like any other form of human cell.
"My best guess is that in an environment outside the body, the cells become dormant," Squilyp said. "They may have been engineered to do so to
prevent unnecessary growth or accidental transfer. They are not fooled by implantation into simulated bodies, either."
"You can't experiment with them on living beings." I gnawed at my bottom lip. "Have you tried organic stimulants?"
He nodded. "Organic, recombinant, and synthesized. The results are the same. No reaction; no growth. Scans show the cells are alive, but inert."
That reminded me. "I have some other samples to give you for testing." I put my medical case on one of the worktables and opened it, removing several
vials of blood and cellular samples I had prepared. "These are from my body. While we are gone on this expedition, I would like you to perform some
specific tests on them, as well as my husband's."
"Of course." He transferred the samples to a refrigerated case. "What do you want me to check?"
"I want to know how to reverse the bioengineering that Joseph Grey Veil performed on us," I said. "In my case, I need a treatment to repair the
tampering performed on my DNA in utero, and in Duncan's, a process that will safely remove all of the chameleon cells from his body."
"What?" Squilyp stopped fiddling with the incubator's controls and stared at me. "Why?"
"If we can somehow undo Joseph's genetic tampering, Reever and I would be able to live normal life spans," I explained. "We could have more
children, grow older, and die a natural death."
For a long moment, the Omorr said nothing. Then he turned his back on me. "No. I won't do it."
I had not counted on his resistance to the idea. "Give me back the samples, then, and I will do the research myself when I have time."
He swiveled around. "Do you even know what you're asking me? Essentially, you want me to find a way to kill you and Duncan."
"Not immediately. Barring disease or injury, the average life span of a Terran in good health is ninety to one hundred twenty years." On Iisleg, we would
have been fortunate to live half so long. "That should be sufficient for us. It is for every other Terran in existence."
"I cannot believe you." Squilyp began hopping around the lab. "You and Duncan are immortal. Every being in the known universe would wipe out entire
star systems to have what you've been given. Now you tell me that you wish to throw away this tremendous advantage?"
"We want to be like every other being and live a normal life span." I gestured toward the incubator. "Whatever you discover in this lab, I can tell you now,
immortality is not an advantage. It is death. The greed for it causes madness and war and destruction. If Duncan and I were like every other Terran, no one
would fight over us. No one would care."
"If you were like other Terrans," Squilyp spat out the words, "Reever would be dead, and so would Cherijo. They would never have met. You wouldn't
even exist. Neither would Marel."
That hurt, almost as much as Xonea's hatred. "Do you know what Duncan asked me to do while we were stranded on Trellus?" I countered. "He told me
that I should implant chameleon cells in Marel's body. Do you know why?"
"She has no need . . ." The Omorr stopped and his eyes rounded. "Of course. As you are, you will both outlive her."
"Undoubtedly." I folded my arms. "I told him I wouldn't do it. I would rather give her away to be raised by the Jorenians--by anyone--than force her to
endure what we have."
"Marel is only a child," Squilyp argued. "This is not a decision you need make now. You have many years before she reaches adulthood."
I held on to my patience with grim determination. "You built this lab to protect your research because you're afraid of it being misused. Bounty hunters
are out there, right now, looking for us. How much longer do you think it will be before the research is stolen, or we are found and taken and dissected?"
The Omorr's hide turned a darker shade of pink. "The Jorenians will protect you."

"If I were a bounty hunter and I knew two immortals lived on this would, do you know what I would do?" I pointed toward the ceiling panels. "I would
gather an armada of ships and launch an attack from orbit. I would wipe out every sign of life on this planet. Then I would go down and find the only two
people left alive. That would be me and Reever."
Squilyp's shoulders sagged. "No one would attack Joren to capture you. No one would dare."
"They already have," I reminded him. "Twice. Three times, if you count the patient that was made into a bomb."
He sat down behind his desk and rested his head against his membranes. "We could arrange an accident--fly a scout into a star and make it look as if
you were killed. We could create new identities for you. Hide you on a world where you would not be found."
"Would you wish to live like that?" I asked softly. "Always running, hiding, afraid of being discovered? Would you wish Marel to do the same, and grow
old while her parents remain young? Do you think you could watch your children grow old and die, all the while knowing that you could never journey to the
next life with them?"
"Omorr do not believe in a next life." He rubbed his eyes, and then saw my face. "No, Jarn. I could not bear the burden of it."
"Then please, old friend, help us." I sat down in front of the desk. "Find a way to reverse what was done to us." I reached across and took one of his
membranes in my hand. "Give us a chance at life. Ordinary life. One we can live in peace."
"I will try." Squilyp gripped my fingers for a moment, and then rose. "Come. I want you to meet one of my new residents."
I had a great many tasks to attend to in order to prepare for the expedition, including telling my daughter about it. "Perhaps another time. I have much to
do."
"You'll want to meet Jylyj," the Omorr assured me. "Xonal told me about this expedition you're planning, and I think this resident could be very useful.
Aside from the fact that Jylyj is a gifted surgeon, he is also Skartesh."
I frowned. "I was told that world had been destroyed during the war."
Squilyp hopped out into the corridor. "It was, but many of the Skartesh escaped before the end." He waited until I came through, and then secured the
access panel. "The survivors have recently established a new colony on one of K-2's moons."
I recalled what Reever had said about the Skartesh being isolationists. "Why is this Jylyj not in residency there?"
"According to his transfer papers, he left K-2 soon after the Skartesh were tricked into attempting a mass suicide. He does not speak of his people at
all, so I imagine it had something to do with that." Squilyp shrugged. "Whatever Jylyj's origins, he's the finest resident I've ever trained. Brilliant in and out
of the surgical suite. I've been assigning him the most challenging cases on the ward, and he's yet to lose a patient. As it happens, he has a reputation of
having a magic touch. All the patients he treats have healed quickly, and with no complications."
I accompanied Squilyp to the surgical ward, where the nurses were preparing for rounds. I had no difficulty spotting the Skartesh, as he was the only
non-Jorenian on the floor.
While Squilyp conferred briefly with the charge nurse, I watched Jylyj assessing a post-op case. He wore a green resident's tunic, fitting for a fourlimbed humanoid male. I had not yet grown accustomed to seeing furred species, so at first glance the dark brown pelt covering his body and face made
him seem more like an animal than a person.
After my initial, unfavorable reaction, I saw reassuring signs that my first impression was in error. The dense black ruff of fur surrounding Jylyj's features
had been trimmed short, as had the five curved black claws on his paws. His eye, as solid black as the Jorenians were white, made me wonder for a
moment if he were a crossbreed. ClanLeader Sajora Kalea, a crossbreed Jorenian, had possessed solid green eyes. The resident's ear flaps stood
straight up on either side of his head, and small circles of some amber alloy hung from the right flap.
Animals, I knew, did not adorn themselves.
The black coloration of Jylyj's slanted eyelids, pointed nose, and lining of his long, narrowed-jawed mouth gave him a menacing look, as did the heavy
musculature of his frame under the fur. At the same time, he moved carefully, and the low tone of his voice as he spoke to the Jorenian patient sounded
warm and pleasant. I noted how gently and efficiently he used the long, clawed digits of his paws to check the surgical dressing and adjust the berth to a
more comfortable alignment. He might look like a killer, but he had the air and focus of a natural healer.
Jylyj looked up and met my gaze.
I could not put a name to what I saw on Jylyj's face and in his eyes. For the most part, ensleg emotions still mystified me. It was what I felt that made me
take a step back. I had never seen him, had never encountered his kind here or anywhere, and yet . . . I knew him.
As he knows you, something whispered soundlessly behind my eyes.
"Senior Healer." After what had happened last night, I did not want to listen to any more voices in my head. "May I speak to you?"
"Forgive me. Two new patients were admitted and I had to schedule their procedures," the Omorr said as he joined me. "Why the Torin must beat each
other senseless in the warrior's quad to prove their manhood, I will never understand." He followed the direction of my gaze and stepped in front of me,
blocking Jylyj from my sight. "You look terrible. What is it?"
I shook off the unnerving sense of recognition. "Nothing," I lied. "A minor headache. Please introduce me to your resident."
For the first time since coming to Joren, I did not impress a fellow colleague. Once Squilyp had introduced me with the usual amount of unnecessary
detail, the Skartesh resident made a brief, modified version of the Jorenian gesture of welcome, and immediately returned to attending to his patient.
"No," I murmured when the Senior Healer began to call him back. Unlike the Omorr, I understood the resident's behavior, and it had nothing to do with
the look we had exchanged earlier. Now that I knew what--and who--I was dealing with, I could act accordingly. "You will perform rounds this morning with
him. I will observe."
"That," the Omorr told me flatly, "is ridiculous. You are a surgeon, not a student."
"Indulge me." I smiled a little at the bizarre sense of satisfaction I felt. At least with this ensleg, I knew exactly what to do.
We made rounds of the ward, and I took care to remain silent and observant, and spoke only when asked a direct question. At first Jylyj treated me with
polite suspicion, but when I did not intrude on his conversations with the Senior Healer or offer any unrequested opinions, most of his animosity
dissipated.
By the time we had finished assessing the patients, Jylyj was speaking freely. Squilyp's evaluation of his abilities had been on the conservative side;
the Skartesh had a sharp eye for details as well as a phenomenal memory. Not once did I see him consult the diagnostic database to confirm his
opinions, all of which were completely accurate.
Squilyp and I left Jylyj calibrating a patient's boneset ter, and only when we were out of earshot did I abandon my ruse. "I will need to speak to your
resident alone."
"You will first explain this farce to me," the Omorr countered.
"The Skartesh does not work well with your female nurses, does he?" I guessed. "He likely performs their tasks as well as his own, and refuses to ask
for assistance."
Squilyp seemed taken aback. "I have heard some minor complaints, but who told you about it?"
"He did. Or, rather, his eyes, the way he holds himself, the brevity with which he spoke to me. They told me that my presence on the ward is deeply
offensive to him." I saw the Omorr still didn't understand. "Squilyp, his kind subjugate their females. Just as the Iisleg did."

"Not on this planet," the Omorr snapped, and then made a disgusted sound. "I should have known. Well, if he is to serve as a healer on Joren, he must
accept that we value ability and dedication, not one gender over the other."
I saw Jylyj watching us from across the ward. "Accepting and liking are not the same. He may not even be aware of what he is doing." I scanned the
ward and spotted a small, unoccupied office. "I will wait in there. When he is finished with that patient, send him to me. Alone, please."
A few minutes later, the Skartesh entered the office. "You wished to speak to me."
"Yes." I gestured toward a chair. When Jylyj made no move to take it, I said, "What I did during rounds was a courtesy to you and your kind. Now you will
show me the same."
His blunt claws curled over against the pads of his paws, the only physical reaction he showed to the abrupt shift in my demeanor. He sat down but
remained poised on the edge of the chair, as if he intended to rise and walk out at any moment.
"I understand your discomfort with me." But I had no intention of indulging it, so I remained on my feet. Jylyj had to look up at me; something an Iisleg
male would have found intolerable. "On my homeworld, females within the tribes were forbidden most freedoms. Before the rebellion, all a woman could
do was prepare food, care for children, sort salvage, and provide physical relief. Until the Raktar came, all of our healers were male. Since I left my
homeworld, I, too, have struggled to adjust to these ensleg ways."
The tight lines bracketing his eyes softened a few degrees. "How may I help you, Healer Cherijo?"
"You may begin by calling me Jarn," I told him.
He gazed at a spot on the wall just to the right of my head. "How may I be of service, Healer Jarn?"
It was almost, but not quite, an insult. One I would have to overlook, too, if I was to convince him to join us. "My husband and I are leading a scientific
expedition to the Saraced system. The Senior Healer tells me that you are a native of that region."
"I was. Skart no longer exists."
I could offer him sympathy, which he obviously didn't want, or get to the heart of the matter. "Our expedition will be traveling to survey a planet called
oKia. Have you ever sojourned to that world?"
He sniffed, and at first I thought my question had offended him. Then he did it again, and I realized he was smelling the air itself, perhaps in much the
same way the Hsktskt tasted it with their tongues.
He stopped sniffing and reluctantly inclined his head. "I know oKia."
Doubtless he would be more open with Squilyp or even Reever, but I refused to admit defeat. As healers, Jylyj and I would have to work together on the
Sunlace. We could not do that if he would not lower himself to converse with me. "What can you tell me about this world?"
The black fur around the base of his ears bristled. "It is cold. There are mountains and tundra. The natives are tribal primitives. Your kind call them
lupine, like the wolves of Terra."
How could he know that, and when had he interacted with Terrans? More questions to be answered.
"We are in need of a guide for the expedition." I took a seat behind the console panel. "Someone who is familiar with the worlds in that region of space,
especially oKia." On Iisleg, females were not permitted to make requests of males unless invited to do so, but there were ways around that. "There is no
one else on Joren with your personal experience."
"I am a surgical resident," Jylyj said, almost snapping out the words, "not a pathfinder. My duties are here."
"This mission is very important to us." I kept my tone level but soft, hoping not to goad him into a rage. "You have knowledge of this world that we do not.
You would be a great asset."
His jaw worked, and I could almost hear his back teeth grinding together. "Healer Jarn, no ship will be permitted to travel through oKiaf space. oKia
resigned from the League. They refuse to have any contact with offworlders. Save yourself the trouble and have your husband call off your expedition now."
"My husband is a talented linguist, and hopes to persuade the oKiaf to make an exception for us." I sensed something more than anger coming from
him now. He was afraid, but of what? "You could still join the expedition as a healer and an adviser--"
"No." He stood. "I cannot accept. I will not."
There was one more thing I had to know. "Do you know me?" When he glared, I added, "When I first saw you, I had the sense that you recognized me."
"I have never met you before today, Healer Jarn, so I could not recognize you. Your pardon, but I have patients waiting for me to attend to them." Before I
could reply, he turned and strode out to the ward.
I stayed in the office and thought about the Skartesh's words and behavior until Squilyp came in.
"Jylyj told me that he refused your request, and then suddenly developed a headache that prevented him from finishing out his shift," the Omorr said.
"Either your headache is contagious, or both of you are lying to me."
"If I explain all this, you will have the headache," I warned him. "What do you know about Jylyj?"
"Why should I answer your questions when you will not answer mine?" Squilyp countered.
"Something about him feels . . . wrong."
"It cannot be his skills as a healer," the Omorr assured me. "He's the finest resident I've ever supervised. His work is faultless."
"I am not questioning his abilities." I did, however, want to know more about his past, and who had been a part of it. "Can you acquire copies of Jylyj's
personnel and transfer data, and send them to my quarters?"
"I can." Squilyp made an impatient gesture. "I will still need a reason why."
"I think Jylyj may have known Cherijo." And I did not want to talk more about that possibility until I reviewed his records. "I must go now."
"I want to know whatever you find out," the Omorr called after me.
I left the medical facility to return to the Torin pavilion and face my next task: telling Marel that her father and I were once more leaving her behind on
Joren. So engrossed was I in sorting out how I would explain the necessity of the separation to our daughter that I did not see the resident waiting outside
for me until I nearly walked into him.
"Oh. Your pardon." I stepped back, dropped my gaze, and made to go around him.
Jylyj stepped into my path. This close, he towered over me. "I must ask forgiveness for my discourtesy to you earlier, Healer Jarn."
"Why?" Puzzled now, I regarded him. When he did not reply, I said, "Resident, I may appear Terran, but I was born on a world where males subjugate
females. They do not offer apologies to them. Why should you?"
"Wherever your homeworld, you are not a Skartesh female." He forced himself to meet my gaze. "It was rude to treat you as such. I am sorry."
I felt as uncomfortable as he did now. "Apology accepted."
He wasn't finished. "My beliefs require me to make amends. If you are still willing to have me serve on the crew, I will join your expedition."
Astonishment left me mute until I realized he was waiting for a response. "That seems a great deal of trouble to go to when you have already
apologized."
"We Skartesh have very specific codes of behavior," he explained. "The only alternative to granting your request would be to prostrate myself in ritual
contrition. It involves providing a period of personal servitude, fasting for several days, and shaving off all of my mane."
The mental image his confession provoked made me press my lips together. "That doesn't sound very comfortable."
"Proper contrition rarely is."

I looked at him, trying to discern a real motive. His features gave nothing away. "Very well, I accept your offer, and will inform the Senior Healer and
make the arrangements. I thank you, Doctor."
"I prefer to be called Jylyj," he said, rather stiffly. "Do you still wish to be addressed as Jarn?" When I nodded, he inclined his head. "Until we meet
again, Jarn." He strode away.

Five
Male laughter greeted me as I entered my quarters at the pavilion. Inside I saw our friends Qonja and Hawk sitting on the floor with Marel and playing a
game of chase the string with the cats.
Reever met me at the door panel and took my hands in his. "You are late." Through the link his touch established, he added, I have warned them that

Xonea is monitoring us.
"Forgive me, but I had to speak with Squilyp's resident." I kissed him. How did you manage to do that?
"You might have signaled." He took Marel's school datapad from his tunic pocket and, using his body to shield it from the drone monitors, typed
carefully on it before he cleared the screen.
Hawk, the crossbreed avatar-Terran who had helped rescue Cherijo after Joseph Grey Veil had abducted her and taken her back to Terra, appeared
very tanned and healthy, as if he had been spending a great deal of time working outdoors. The wide, brown-feathered wings he had once concealed by
pretending to be a hunchback now lay folded beneath his broad shoulders.
"Jarn." Hawk came to envelop me in his arms and wings for a fond embrace. "It is good to see you."
I hugged him back before exchanging a warm gesture of greeting with Qonja, Hawk's bondmate. The Jorenian male also looked quite fit and happy.
"I'm glad to see you, but surprised, too," I told Qonja, and turned to touch my brow to his in the Jorenian manner of greeting. "I thought Reever said that
you were dwelling with the Kalea now."
"We were. As soon as we received word of your return, we thought it a prudent time to pay a visit." Qonja indicated some beautifully woven Jorenian
baskets on our dining table. "We brought some of Galena Kalea's morning breads, which are finer than any I have ever tasted, including those of my
former ClanMother." A flicker of sadness crossed his handsome face before he added, "Hawk has a new dish he wishes you to try, as well. What say we
share a meal?"
I glanced at Reever, who nodded. "I think we would all enjoy that very much."
Over an enormous meal of breads and a tasty stew Hawk prepared from spicy native roots and blossoms, we spoke of mutual friends and recent
events on Joren. Qonja and Hawk did not ask about Trellus, and Reever and I did not speak of the colony or our upcoming expedition. For the most part,
we listened to our daughter chatter on about her friends and schoolwork, and some of the sights she had seen while traveling with Salo and Darea. Then
Fasala arrived to take Marel to an evening gathering for the HouseClan's children, leaving the four of us alone. I prepared tea for everyone and then sat
down with the men.
"That was a fine dish, Hawk," I said, "and if you will program it in our prep unit, I will be most grateful. But did you really come all this way to prepare a
new dish for us?"
"Not exactly." Hawk looked at his bondmate.
Qonja took his hand as his expression turned solemn. "We have news, unhappy as it is. While you were away, Hawk and I petitioned the Ruling Council
to recognize our bond and overturn the repudiation from my HouseClan. They have refused."
Hawk and Qonja were both male, and under the present law were prohibited from Choosing each other as bondmates. The fact that they had done so,
and had gone so far as to openly declare their bond in front of Jorenian witnesses, had caused Qonja to be repudiated by his natal kin, HouseClan Adan.
"So the council is siding with the Adan," Reever said. "You must have expected that."
Qonja nodded. "We had hoped, of course, that they would break with tradition and rule in our favor, but we were not startled when they did not. Our
oldest customs and laws govern matters of Choice. It will take more than one petition to effect changes."
"Can you petition them again?" I was a member of the council; surely I could do something about this.
"It would not be advisable. As it is, our presence on Joren is only tolerated out of respect for my former ClanFather," Qonja admitted. "A second petition
might provoke the council into taking more aggressive action, such as rescinding my citizenship and residential status. If that happens, Hawk and I will
both be deported."
"I have tried to convince him to revoke our bond," Hawk said, his unhappiness plain. "It would placate the council and the Adan, and we can still be
together, if we are discreet."
Qonja kissed the back of Hawk's hand. "I will never hide my honor for you, evlanar." With his free hand he made a careless gesture. "It matters not.
Even now, word of our bond is spreading throughout the HouseClans. The customs and laws regulating Choice has been questioned for some time by
younger Jorenians. Despite the beliefs of my people, it would seem that not everyone who Chooses wishes to procreate."
"Such changes often take a very long time to happen, especially among sexually repressed species," Reever said. "What do the Kalea say about this?
"
"Like me, they are crossbreeds," Hawk said, "and the ClanLeaders, Jakol and Sajora Kalea, have openly accepted our bond. They even accompanied
us before the council to show their support for our petition. But if the council decides to take further action against us, such support could also result in
serious repercussions for the Kalea. Some of the more conservative Adan have spoken of having HouseClan Kalea declared lawless and officially
disbanded for offering us shelter."
"Which we cannot allow to happen to our friends, not after all they have done for us," Qonja added. "Until the law changes, Hawk and I feel we should
make our home away from Joren."
"Terra will not grant you asylum or residential status," Reever said. "Where will you go?"
"We would prefer to find an open and tolerant multispecies colony, like the one established on Kevarzangia Two," Qonja said. "But I think it would be
best if we left Joren as soon as possible. Xonal Torin mentioned to us that you are heading an expedition into the Saraced system. Would you consider
allowing Hawk and I to serve as members of the crew?"
"Of course," I said at once. "We would be glad to have you with us." I thought for a moment. "How would you wish to serve on the crew?"
"My people on Terra lived under primitive tribal conditions," Hawk put in. "I may be able to help you interpret some of the customs and practices of the
oKiaf. I also have first-aid training, so I can assist you in the medical bay when necessary."
"I can serve as the expedition's psychologist," Qonja said. "Or your personal bodyguard, as before."
The door panel chimed, preventing my answer, and I went to answer it. One glance at the external display made me frown.
"Xonea." I opened the panel.
"I would speak to you and your bondmate." The captain of the Sunlace walked in past me and stopped as he saw our guests. "Forgive me, I do not
mean to interrupt."
"Then you should have waited rather than come here at this hour," Reever replied.
I saw that my husband was still spoiling for a fight with my ClanBrother. "Whatever the hour or circumstance, we are all still friends. Come and join us,
Captain."

Xonea greeted Qonja and Hawk in a polite but reserved fashion, refused my offer of tea, and remained on his feet. "My ClanFather has spoken to me
of this expedition you intend to take to Saraced. Given the current political situation there, I advise against it."
"He must have also told you that oKia is one of three worlds on the Aksellan map that was not marked as harboring the black crystal," I said. "It is
important that we discover if that is still the case, and if so, why."
"You acquired this mining map from the Trellusans," Xonea said. "What if it is not authentic? What if they counterfeited it in order to lure you and Duncan
to this world?"
"Why resort to such an elaborate ruse?" I spread out my hands. "They had the means to keep us imprisoned on Trellus. If they wished to collect a bounty
for us, why would they give us a map and let us go? How could they know we would choose to sojourn to oKia, for that matter?"
His mouth tightened. "I do not like this. We can protect you better on Joren than in open space."
"That is why I asked Xonal to have you transport the expedition on the Sunlace," I pointed out. "There is no one we trust more to keep us safe."
My ClanBrother turned his head and eyed Reever, who nodded his agreement. "Very well. If you are to go, it will be on my ship." He then regarded
Qonja and Hawk. "I suppose you two intend to accompany us."
"Jarn has consented to our joining the crew, but it is your ship," Qonja said, his tone cool. "If our presence is as unwelcome there as it has been almost
everywhere else, we should be told now."
Xonea had been the one to expose Qonja and Hawk's relationship to the Adan, I recalled.
"There has been much debate among the Houses over your bond," Xonea said. "I am like most of our people in that I value our traditions and wish to
see them preserved. I also believe the primary responsibility of those who Choose is to have children. Still, even one such as I can see the bond that
exists between you and Hawk. It appears as real and enduring as"--he glanced at me--"any other I have witnessed."
Qonja put his hand on Hawk's shoulder. "It is."
"Then this time, I will save you some trouble and assign you both to the same quarters on the Sunlace." Xonea turned to Reever. "The ship has been
undergoing some refitting at the Zamlon docks. I am traveling there tomorrow to inspect the work. If you and Jarn wish to accompany me, I will call for you
in the morning."
Like Xonea's, my husband's expression gave away none of his feelings. "We would, thank you."
"Be ready to leave by midrise." With a nod to the rest of us, my ClanBrother left.
"Am I hallucinating?" Hawk asked softly, "Or did I just hear Captain Xonea Torin acknowledge our bond?"
Qonja grinned. "If you did not, it was a shared hallucination."
I heard a low, distressed sound, and looked past Qonja to see our daughter standing on the other side of the room with Fasala just inside the entrance
to the courtyard.
"Your pardon, Healer Jarn." Fasala looked miserable. "I did not wish to interrupt your visit, so I brought Marel back through the courtyard."
"It's all right, Fasala." The stricken look on Marel's small face told me how much of our discussion she had overheard. "I am sorry we did not have the
chance to talk to you about the sojourn first."
"You told ClanUncle and Hawk and even Fasala." Marel knuckled away the tears in her eyes and gave me a defiant look. "You told everyone about it.
Everyone but me. Now what will my friends say?" She ran off to her room, and Reever followed her.
"I think we should go," Hawk said, and gave me a brief farewell embrace. Against my ear, he murmured, "The young are very forgiving."
After I saw out Qonja and Hawk, I returned to hear the sounds of my daughter sobbing and Reever speaking in a low, soothing voice.
"Since your return from Trellus, Marel has been telling our friends that you would be staying and making your home here with us," Fasala explained.
"She even spoke to our ClanLeader about planting a garden of Terran vegetables, to see if they would grow here. I think this is the cause of her distress."
"I knew she was becoming attached to this world, but . . ." I stopped and rubbed my eyes with my fingers. "We cannot take her with us on this
expedition; it is too dangerous. Perhaps she will feel better when she knows that."
"I think not, Healer," Fasala said. "Each time you leave her, Marel fears you will not return. Her true happiness is walking within beauty with you and
Linguist Reever." With a sympathetic gesture, the Jorenian girl also departed.
When Marel was upset, Reever always managed her better than I could, so I busied myself with tidying up. An hour passed before he emerged and
joined me in the food prep area.
"She is sleeping now." He put his arm around my waist. "Don't blame yourself, beloved. We knew this news would be difficult for her to accept."
I knew, and still it did not make a difference. "I know it must be this way, and still I cannot bear to hear her weeping like that." I took a deep breath and
faced him. "Fasala mentioned something. It seems our daughter has been telling the other children that we were to make a home here. A permanent
home."
Reever frowned. "I have not said any such thing to her. Have you?"
I shook my head. "Who would make her believe something like that?"
"Perhaps something was said by someone who wishes us to remain on Joren." His gaze shifted to the drone concealed in a nearby wall.
Xonea, of course. Another of his controlling tactics, and this time he used it on my daughter.
This time, he had made my daughter cry.
I couldn't bear another moment of this farce, so I reached into the storage container and removed the largest, sharpest blade from it. "Look over there,
Husband." I made my voice as loud as I could without disturbing the child. "I think someone has planted a spying device in our quarters."
"Jarn." Duncan shook his head.
He was right; what I meant to do was a foolish thing. And I didn't care. I went over to the wall and drove the knife into the embedded drone. The plasteel
shattered the monitoring device, causing a short spray of sparks to shoot out of the wall.
"I wonder if there are others. Let me look." I went to the next. "Oh, dear, here is another one." I used the blade to pry this one out of the wall panel, and
peered into its tiny lens. "Are you getting this picture, spy?" I dropped the drone to the floor and stomped on it until it lay in small pieces.
Reever did not stop me as I went from drone to drone and systematically destroyed all but one of them. With the last, I carefully removed it from its
hiding place and brought it over to the disposal unit.
"Hello," I said to the drone. "Please be advised of the following: If I find another monitoring device within a hundred meters of me, Reever, or Marel, I will
have the person responsible explain why to the Ruling Council." I paused. "After I beat him senseless for intruding on our privacy and deceiving our child."
I crushed the drone in my hand before I dropped the remains into the disposal.
Reever came to stand next to me. "Regarding the beating, you will have to wait your turn."
"Good." I turned and went to the room terminal, and prepared a formal text signal before I asked my husband to translate it into Jorenian for me. As he
read the message, I said, "I will send it now, unless you have any objections."
He gave me one of his rare half smiles. "None at all."
Marel woke up early, but said little to us as she had her morning meal and prepared for her day at school.
I did not like this silence, not when I had grown accustomed to the child's bright, endless chatter. But Reever had suggested I let her have some time to

adjust to the news of the expedition before I discussed it with her. Saying nothing made me feel as unhappy as the child, but I knew he was right.
We did not talk at all during the brief walk from our quarters to the school, but just before she entered her class Marel looked up at me.
The storm-dark color of her eyes told me she had not yet forgiven us for disappointing her. "Will I stay again with ClanUncle Salo and ClanAunt Darea
while you are gone, Mama?"
"That is our wish." I knelt down in front of her. "Marel, we love you, and we are very sorry that we hurt you. We should have told you first about the
expedition. You are the most important person in our lives."
"I want to be like the other kids here," she told me. "They never have to be away from their families. Everyone stays together. That's what kin does. If you
and Daddy can't be on Joren with me, then you should take me with you on the expedition."
"We could," I agreed. "But we will have much work to do, and this time there will be no other children on board the ship. I fear it would be very boring for
you."
"Then don't go, Mama." Tears sparkled in her eyes. "Stay here with me."
I took her hands in mine. "An Iisleg woman cannot break a promise she makes, you know that." When she nodded, I said, "When we return from this
sojourn, I vow that Daddy and I will take you on a special trip. We won't work or have meetings or be away from you. We will go only where you want to go,
and only be where you want us to be."
"I miss my friends at HouseClan Kalea. ClanLeader Jory said the next time I visited that she would teach me how to ride a t'lerue." Clearly tempted,
Marel bit her lower lip. "You promise, Mama?"
I pressed her hand to my heart. "I swear it."
Marel flung her arms around my neck and hugged me tightly. I held her until her teacher came to the entrance, and only then did I release her to join the
class.
Reever stood waiting for me outside the pavilion. "Xonea signaled while you were out. He has gone ahead to check some of the engine work."
"Perhaps he can have the Zamlon fix his monitoring drones, as well." I went with Reever to the glidecar waiting at the end of the walking path. "I
promised Marel that we would spend some time with her after the expedition. It is not enough, though. Soon we must decide how and where we are to live
as a family."
"We can discuss it during the sojourn." Reever opened the passenger side of the vehicle for me. "For now, stop it."
I glanced at him. "Stop what?"
"Worrying about our daughter, the expedition, the new bounty being offered, Xonea, and everything else in your head." He buckled me into my harness.
"We are together. Marel is safe. That is enough for now."
I envied Reever that unwavering assurance, especially when I saw the glint from a tiny lens wink at me from a corner of the interior floor covering. As my
husband went around to the other side of the vehicle, I bent down and swiftly yanked the monitoring drone out of the textured material.
"This should not take too long," Reever said as he climbed in behind the control console. "Xonea has much to do to prepare for the sojourn."
"Good." I pocketed the drone. "So do I."
On the trip to the Zamlon dock yards, Reever kept me distracted from my thoughts by reviewing the crew manifest for the expedition. Many of the most
experienced flight officers among the Torin had been slated to accompany us, along with a full complement of skilled nurses to serve in medical, and
combat-trained militia for security. I was a little surprised to discover my husband, not Xonea, had consulted with Xonal to handpick the crew.
"Are we going on a sojourn, or declaring war on the oKia?" I tried to joke.
"I prefer to be prepared." Reever slowed outside a restricted area and presented our identifications to a Zamlon security officer.
Beyond the gated entry stood open framework enclosures built around a dozen massive star vessels in various stages of construction and repair.
Surrounding them were smaller, sleeker scouts and launches perched on lifts or suspended from cranes. Zamlon shipbuilders swarmed around, over, and
under the vessels as they worked on them. Drone transports glided back and forth from enormous storage structures as they hauled heavy loads of cargo
and construction materials.
I knew the Jorenians drew on forms from nature to design their star vessels; the Sunlace resembled the spi raling shell of a sea creature. Now I saw
other, strangely compelling vessel designs that ranged from a cluster of falling stars to the closed petals of an enormous flower.
One ship in particular stood out from the others; a twin-hulled vessel only partially completed but already a magnet for the eye. Made of some dark
golden alloy, the ship had an unusual amount of large viewer panels and double launch bays large enough to hold twenty or thirty smaller scout vessels. I
had seen the remains of thousands of vessels during my years on Akkabarr, yet none of them even remotely resembled the design of this ship.
"Is that golden runner some sort of troop transport?" I asked my husband as we left the glidecar and walked to the Sunlace.
Reever paused to study it. "It's not carrying enough weapons." He saw the two launch bays. "It's designed primarily to transport smaller vessels, but far
more than the crew and passengers would ever need." He tilted his head. "Those containment sections appear to be made to hold a separate type of
atmosphere."
"They hold water," a low, pleasant voice said as a Jorenian in heavy welding gear joined us. "The crew are mostly 'Zangian aquatics. The ship itself will
serve as an orbital base ship for planetary biorescue missions."
The Jorenian removed his headgear, revealing a bald, dark green head and friendly white-within-white eyes.
"You must be the Kalean shipbuilder," I guessed.
"Nalek Kalea," he said, grinning to show strong, white Jorenian teeth as he made a warm gesture of greeting. "You two are the little comet's parents,
Jarn and Duncan."
"We are." I raised my brow. "Little comet?"
"Our pet name for your ClanDaughter," Nalek said. "Never have I met a child as small, fast, shining, or determined as Marel."
Nalek exchanged more formal greetings with Reever before escorting us to the Sunlace's dock.
"Preparations for launch are nearly complete," the Kalean told us after introducing his project manager. "The ship should ready to return to orbit before
the end of the week."
"I understood you to be a ship designer," I said, eye ing some unfamiliar exterior changes on the vessel. "Why are you involved with the work on the
Sunlace?"
"Captain Torin requested modifications be made to the weapons systems. Here, I will show you." Nalek brought us to the starboard weapons array, and
indicated some unfamiliar fittings and emitters. "Here the defense cannons have been modified. They can now deliver both pulse bursts and displacer
ordnance."
"Jorenians don't use displacer technology," I said, more confused now. "Only the Hsktskt do."
"Pulse weapons are more precise, but displacer charges do more damage," Nalek explained. "Captain Torin was quite specific about fitting the ship to
deliver both."
I spotted the Jorenian in question walking toward us. "Was he?"
Xonea offered a brief greeting before speaking to Nalek about an engine modification. At last he looked at me. "You will wish to go on board and
inspect the medical bay."

"I intend to," I said. "But first I would like to know why you've had the ship's weapons array refitted to deliver displacer ordnance."
"We have received reports of recent attacks on ships traveling throughout the quadrant," Xonea said, "carried out by a small band of mercenaries.
Their success is due to a new technology that shielded their ships against standard League pulse weaponry."
"Surely we can outrun some raiders," I said.
"Several vessels that were attacked by these mercenaries have been brought to the docks for repairs," Nalek said. "From what the captains tell us, the
attackers come out of nowhere to disable their engines, perform intensive remote scans, and vanish again."
"What sort of intensive scans?" Reever asked.
The shipbuilder made an uncertain gesture. "Nothing our equipment can identify, but they're powerful. They scan the entire ship, access all the
databases, and then leave."
"Slavers used the same tactic on captured vessels," my husband said. "They board them and use the readings from remote scans to locate what they
want."
I glanced at Reever, and my heart tightened. "Or who."
He nodded, and then told the Jorenians, "The mercenaries are most likely bounty hunters scanning the ships for Terran life signs. They're looking for me
and Jarn."
Nalek thought about it. "If they're only interested in finding two Terrans, it will not be difficult on a ship crewed mainly by Jorenians."
"I have had Nalek increase the sensitivity of our ship-to-ship proximity alarms," Xonea said. "As soon as they transition anywhere within one hundred
thousand kim of the Sunlace, we will know and take action."
"It would be better to make them think there are no Terrans on board," my husband said, and turned to Nalek. "When I piloted a slave runner, we
adjusted the external reflectors to shield the crew by constantly projecting Rilken life signs. All it required was a portable simulator and some creative
circuit bypasses."
Nalek grimaced. "A clever ploy. No slaver would attack a Rilken ship, not even if they were desperate."
Reever nodded. "Perhaps the same can be done by adjusting the Sunlace's buffer grid to use the dimensional simulators to alter my and Jarn's life
signs to read as Jorenian as the rest of the crew."
Nalek slowly smiled. "With some very improper rigging, yes, I think it possible." He glanced at me and Xonea. "May I borrow your bondmate for a few
minutes?"
I agreed, and waited until the men boarded the ship before I spoke to my ClanBrother. "Did you get my message last night?"
He stiffened. "I received no signal from you."
"It wasn't a signal. At least, not after I destroyed all the drones you planted in our quarters. But you needn't worry. I saved one that I found this morning." I
took from my pocket the monitoring drone I had found in the vehicle. "Here, let me repeat the message." I dropped the drone on the ground between us
and crushed it under my footgear.
My ClanBrother looked away from the ruined device, but said nothing.
"I don't care that you dislike me, Xonea," I advised him, "and out of my regard for our mutual kin I've tolerated your pathetic attempts to spy on me and
Reever. But lying to my child? That seems excessive, even for you."
Now he glared at me. "Jorenians do not lie."
"I know you were the one who told Marel that we would be making a home here on Joren," I snapped. "Neither Reever nor I have ever agreed to do so.
No one else would be so cruel."
"You are a member of the Ruling Council. A ClanDaughter of the Torin," he reminded me. "Joren is your home."
"Last night I resigned from the council," I told him, and enjoyed the jolt of shock that crossed his stern face.
"You cannot resign without my approval," Xonea finally said. "I will petition the council to have you reinstated."
"On what grounds will you file the petition on my behalf? Mental instability due to the effects of the amnesia?" I made my smile icy and sweet. "That was
the reason I gave for my resignation."
Xonea stepped closer. "You think you have prevailed over me? I am still your closest blood kin. As such, I can call off the expedition. I can revoke your
privileges as a citizen. I can even have you committed to a psychiatric facility for as long as I think appropriate."
"If I remain a member of HouseClan Torin. I can think of several ways to provoke an act of repudiation. Threatening to kill a ClanBrother before our kin,
for example, would serve quite well." The words hung between us for a time. Then I said, "If that is what it will take to put an end to your harassment of me
and my family, Xonea, I will do it."
"You would destroy the honor of my ClanBrother Kao, of my kin, simply to thwart me?" Horror filled his eyes. "You are mad."
"No more than someone who would rather see me imprisoned than allow me my freedom," I shot back. "You are no better than the bounty hunters or the
League. Or Cherijo's father."
Xonea turned his back on me with a jerky motion and stared out at the horizon. After a long silence, he said, "So now the path changes."
I recalled what I had learned of Jorenian philosophy, and made the correct response. "So, too, must the traveler."
"You will not withdraw your resignation from the council?" He watched me shake my head. "Neither would she. Cherijo did not believe in half measures
or surrender. She fought unto the end."
"So will I," I promised him.
I saw Reever and Nalek emerge from the ship and start toward us. "How will it be, then, Captain?"
Xonea picked up the pieces of the drone and put them in his tunic pocket. "You have your freedom, Healer."

Six
Reever and I left the rest of the preparations for the expedition in the capable hands of the crew, and spent the remaining time we had on Joren with
Marel. I knew we had not banished all her worries over the coming separation, but neither of us wished to distress her further by referring to it or trying to
explain all the important reasons we had to go.
Instead we did what we had had precious little time to do: enjoyed each day together as a family, taking her on outings, playing all of her favorite
games, and accompanying her to the Torin's evening gatherings. After several days of having our undivided affection and attention, Marel regained most
of her natural, sunny happiness, and seemed to forget that we were soon to leave her again.
A reminder came when Nalek Kalea signaled Duncan early one morning to request his presence at the docks to inspect some interior modification on
the Sunlace.
"I would send someone else, but no one understands the specifications as well as I do," he told me. "I will return in a few hours."
We had been late returning from last night's gathering, and the child was still sleeping, so I saw no harm in it. "If Marel wakes before you come back, I
will take her down to the shore." I kissed him. "But don't be too long."
Soon after that our daughter did wake, and grew petulant as soon as she realized her father had left. "You and Daddy said we would go to see the new
baby t'lerue today. ClanAunt Darea says they are just starting to lope."
"We will," I told her. "But first I would like to walk down to the water. You said that you would show me where to find the prettiest shells."
She pouted. "You don't like shells, Mama. The first time you saw my collection, you asked me why I was keeping jars of skeletons in my room."
I suppressed a wince. I had been vaguely horrified to find Marel collecting the remains of deceased crustaceans, until Duncan had explained that they
were considered by many species as ornamental objects.
"There are no seas or sea creatures on Akkabarr, so I did not know the proper term for them." That much was true. "I like them well enough." That
wasn't.
Marel saw right through me. "You're just saying that so I won't be mad about Daddy being gone."
"I am a healer, and I may be called upon to treat patients with exoskeletons," I said, keeping my tone firm. "Learning more about them could help me
with my work." If I ever went to a sea world and had to rescue mollusks.
That seemed to placate her. "All right. But I want to take some string so I can make a necklace for Daddy."
"Of course." I squashed the unappealing image of Reever wearing a loop of tiny skeletons around his neck. At least she hadn't wanted to make one for
me. "I know he will love it."
HouseClan Torin's territory was known as Marine province, and for good reason. The distance from the pavilion to the shoreline was less than a mile,
an easy walk from our quarters. Yet by the time we reached the dark, golden sands of the beach, Marel's enthusiasm had dimmed again.
"Here we are." I ignored her unhappy expression and took her hand, leading her up to the top of a dune to look across the seemingly endless stretch of
amber sand forming a pretty fringe on the purple waters. "Where should we start searching?" I pointed to a promising-looking cluster of small dead
bodies. "There?"
"No, those are too old. They're all bleached out from the sun." She sat down at my feet and rested her chin against her knees. "I don't want any shells."
I sat down beside her. "We could build dwellings of sand. You could sculpt a Terran castle for me, and I could make . . . a jlorra enclosure."
Her face turned up. "Mama, let Daddy go alone on the sojourn. Nothing bad will happen if you stay here with me."
If Xonea had made Marel think that I was in danger by going on the expedition, this time I'd smash more than a couple of recording drones. "Why do
you think something bad will happen?"
"My dreams." She ducked her head. "I have them almost every night now, and they're really awful. In the dreams I see you go away, and you never come
back."
"You are not dreaming; you are remembering what happened after we visited Oenrall." I put my arm around her. "That was when I was taken from you
and Daddy, and I didn't come back. Daddy had to find me."
"No, it's not about the time when I was a baby. It's different," she insisted. "In my dreams you're wearing your blades under your tunic, and there is a little
purple flower in your hair. You hug me and kiss me good-bye, and then I never see you again."
"Well, I know what to do about that," I said. "I promise you, I will never hug you again."
"Mama."
"Or kiss you. As for this little purple flower"--I rolled my eyes up toward my hairline--"I will slice open the first person who tries to put it on my head."
A giggle escaped her. "What if it's me or Daddy?"
"I can't gut either of you. Hmmm." I pretended to think about it. "I know. I will yell 'No' very loud, and then I will run away." I touched my forehead to hers in
Jorenian fashion. "I promise you."
"Mama, you're so silly." Sighing, Marel pulled me to my feet. "Come on, I'll show you the tide pools. That's where the best shells are."
We half ran, half skidded our way down the side of the dune, and then walked toward a cluster of flat stones that held shallow pools of dark water.
Something caught Marel's eye, and she stopped and pointed. "Who's that, Mama?"
I shaded my eyes with my hand and saw in the distance a tall, lean figure rising from the water and removing a breather. Black swimming trunks
covered the man's hips, but the rest of his body remained bare. At first I thought him a crossbreed like Nalek Kalea, until he shook himself all over to shed
the water from his dark brown pelt.
"I think that is Jylyj, a Skartesh resident who works at the medical facility." I cupped my hands over my mouth and called out his name, and then waved.
The Skartesh halted and turned toward the sound of my voice, but instead of returning my call or waving back, he waded out of the water, picked up
some gear, and disappeared behind a dune.
"Why did he go away?" Marel asked, clearly disappointed.
"I don't know." I watched for a moment longer, but Jylyj did not reappear. "Perhaps he had to report for duty. It matters not." I held out my hand. "Come."
We hunted shells for the rest of the morning, collecting a large variety from the tide pools. Although they still looked like skeletons to me, I admired each
one and helped Marel string the smallest and most colorful to make a necklace.
On our walk back to the pavilion, Reever met us halfway, and gravely ducked his head so Marel could loop the necklace of shells around his neck.
"Do you like it, Daddy?"
"I have never had such a gift. Thank you, avasa." He picked her up in his arms and gave me a pointed look. "Next time you must make one for your
mother."
"Mama says healers can't wear ornaments because of the scanners they use," Marel confided to him. "The shells would make the readings wrong."
"I could speak to the Senior Healer," Reever suggested. "Perhaps he could adjust the scanners."

"No need." I showed my husband some teeth. "I will take pleasure in seeing you wear yours."
On the way back to our quarters, Marel told her father about the tiny water creatures we had discovered in the tide pools, and how they tickled our
fingers as we searched for shells.
"There are more bigger ones that live out on the sand-bar, but Mama doesn't swim, so she said we couldn't go there without you." Marel glanced at me.
"Mama, you should ask the wolf man to teach you to swim."
"The wolf man?"
"We saw Jylyj at the other end of the shore," I explained. "He was swimming."
Reever gave me an odd look. "You must be mistaken."
"No, I'm almost sure it was him." Something occurred to me. "Unless there are other Skartesh on Joren--that might explain why he left as soon as I
called out to him."
Later that evening, after Marel had gone to sleep, Reever asked me again about seeing the Skartesh down at the shoreline. "Tell me everything you
remember."
I described how Marel had spotted Jylyj coming out of the water, how the Skartesh had removed his breather, and how quickly he had left after I had
called to him.
"It could not have been Jylyj," Reever said after I had finished. "His species cannot tolerate water."
I shook my head. "Every living thing needs some form of water to survive."
"Come here, I will show you." Reever took me to the room terminal and accessed the database for information on the Skartesh.
I read the section displayed about species environmental hazards. "They are hydrophobic?"
"To such an extreme degree that no Skartesh would voluntarily go near the water," Reever told me. "Exposure to any amount makes them ill. Immersion
causes shock and unconsciousness."
"The male I saw was tall, dark, and covered in fur," I said, "and he moved like Jylyj. I am convinced it was him. But if no Skartesh can endure water
exposure, then ..."
"He cannot be Skartesh," Reever said, finishing my thought.
My husband and I had already encountered one alterformed being on Vtaga. PyrsVar, a renegade Hsktskt male whose body had been altered to
appear Jorenian, had been one such being. SrrokVar, one of Cherijo's old enemies, had alterformed the renegade as part of his plan to infect League
worlds with the Vtagan plague.
I didn't want to believe that I had invited an alterform to join our expedition. "He would have had to submit a DNA sample in order to obtain a transfer
from K-2 to Joren."
Reever nodded. "But as a doctor living among the Skartesh, he could have easily obtained a genuine DNA sample from one of their males and
submitted it as his own."
I felt a little sick. "I should ask him if that is what he did."
"If Jylyj has been alterformed, it could not have been for any innocent reason," Reever said. "Confronting him is too dangerous."
"I agree, but as he is a member of the expedition, I would rather find out now than while we are in space." I picked up one of my medical scanners and
turned it over in my hands. "If only I could perform a physical on him. I could say it is a requirement for everyone going on the expedition."
"That is not standard crew procedure, and he has worked on Joren for some time now. He will know you are lying." Reever took the scanner from me
and set it aside. "We'll think of something else."
"Jylyj was off duty this morning, so he will be working the night shift at the medical facility," I said. "There are some patients I would like to see before we
leave. I think I will go over there now."
Reever didn't like that. "What are you planning to do?"
"If I can obtain a sample of his DNA, that should confirm what he is." I glanced down as Jenner rubbed his head against my calf, and then leapt up onto
my lap and butted his head against my chest.
"Whether he is Skartesh or not, you will have to have his cooperation to obtain a sample," my husband warned. "He will first want to know why you want
it."
"True." I put the cat down on the floor, and looked at the stray silver hairs left on my trousers. "Unless I can collect the DNA from somewhere other than
his person."
"Be careful." Reever handed me my blade harness. "For if you do not return in two hours, I will go to collect the Skartesh's DNA. With a blade."
Driving to the medical facility took only a few moments, and after signing in with the duty nurse at reception, I went up to the surgical floor. I didn't bother
to announce myself, but made my way around the quiet, dimly lit ward, stopping here and there to read charts. As I expected, Jylyj left the ward station as
soon as he saw me and came to the berth where I stood.
"I was not aware you were on call, Jarn," he said, his voice low so as not to disturb the patient.
"I'm not. I couldn't sleep, and I know Squilyp is in the capital, so I thought I would stop in and check on the ward." I handed him the chart. "This female's
bone scans look very good." I pulled up the linens covering the bonesetters clamped to her fractured legs, exposing her to the waist, but did not pull them
back in place. "If her progress remains stable, she should be scheduled to begin physical therapy by the end of the week."
"I stated the same on the consult I sent to the physical therapist earlier this evening." He hung the chart on the end of the berth before re-draping the
patient's limbs. "Is there anything else?"
"I saw you today down at Adalan Point as you came out of the water." I came around the berth and looked up at him. "Why did you ignore me when I
called to you?"
"I don't know what you mean. I was not in any water." He didn't look guilty or angry, only bewildered. "My species cannot tolerate immersion of any kind."
"I saw a Skartesh male walking out of the water," I said. "To my knowledge, you are the only Skartesh, male or female, presently on Joren."
"I'm sorry, but it was not me," he replied. "I had a duty shift scheduled for tonight, so I spent most of the morning asleep in my bed."
I mimed a doubtful expression. "Then who did I see down there?"
"Perhaps no one," he said very tentatively. "Stress combined with exhaustion sometimes causes visual hallucinations. Have you spoken to the Senior
Healer about your insomnia? He'll be returning tomorrow, and he might prescribe a tranquilizer to help you rest."
His concern seemed so genuine that it nearly convinced me of his innocence. I did not have hallucinations, however. I also knew that an alterform would
be trained to put on a superb performance, including how to justify any mistakes he made.
I would have to rely on what his DNA told me.
"Thank you for the advice. I will speak to Squilyp about it before we leave." I lifted my medical case. "While I am here, I would like to recharge my
personal syrinpresses and requisition some additional equipment. Would you ask one of the nurses to meet me in the drug storage room?"
He nodded and went off to the nurses' station. I quickly pulled on a glove and retrieved the three long, dark brown hairs adhering to the strip of spray
adhesive I had surreptitiously applied to the edge of the berth linens, and placed them in a small specimen container. By the time a nurse reported to me I
had stowed the hairs in the bottom of my case.

Once I had recharged my syrinpresses with the standard medications a traveling physician carried, I asked the nurse to requisition a DNA scanner for
me, and added that to my case.
My request did perplex the nurse, who asked, "Do you expect to do a great deal of genetic testing during your sojourn, Healer?"
"I doubt it, but I would rather be prepared than not." I glanced out at the nurses' station, where Jylyj was writing up patient orders. "The path is not the
only thing that changes."
I returned to our quarters and immediately removed from my case the hairs I had collected from Jylyj to scan them. Reever brought me a server of tea
and watched silently as the results appeared on the display.
"The DNA from his hair follicles is that of an adult Skartesh male," I said, disappointed. "Either he really is Skartesh, or a shape-shifter like Tya, who
can manipulate his own DNA. Either way, he is not an alterform." One unusual reading caught my eye--an elevated PH level--and I scanned the hairs
again, but this time for minerals. "There are trace amounts of sodium chloride on the outside of the follicle and the hair shaft."
"It could be salt residue from his sweat," Reever suggested.
"Or from seawater." I went to the terminal and accessed the database. Like most furred beings, the Skartesh did not sweat through their pores. "It is not
from sweat. Jylyj perspires only through his respiratory tract."
Reever leaned over my shoulder and tapped the console, bringing up another section. "Skartesh also cleanse themselves by applying dry sand to their
pelts."
That confused me. "What has sand bathing to do with salt residue?"
"In antiquity, this region was covered by seawater," he said. "I doubt you will find any soil on Torin land that does not contain some trace of salt."
I hated it when my husband destroyed one of my theories. "So there is no valid reason to suspect that Jylyj is anything but what he appears to be." I
thought about what the resident had suggested. "What if this has something to do with me instead of him? Could it have been some errant memory that
made me imagine that I saw him in the water?"
"Neither I nor Cherijo had any contact with the Skartesh," Reever said. "The species were still living on their homeworld when she was serving on K-2.
By the time they fled their planet, you were already on Akkabarr."
"Where I never saw a single Skartesh, either." I pressed the heels of my hands against my eyes. "Perhaps I did make a mistake, and saw someone
else who resembled Jylyj. That would explain why the male did not respond to my call." But I had been so sure, and that still bothered me.
"Let it go for now." My husband reached over, switched off the terminal, and drew me to my feet. "Come to bed."
Thinking about the Skartesh kept me from sleeping well that night, but near dawn I finally drifted off from exhaustion. I woke alone, and found a message
from Reever stating that he and Marel had gone on an outing to see the famous tiered gardens of HouseClan Varena, and would return later that day.
I suspected my husband had been aware of my restlessness and had taken our daughter out to allow me additional time to sleep. But I had no desire to
return to bed or spend the day in idleness. Fortunately, Squilyp signaled soon after that to ask if I would work a few hours at the medical facility.
"The Adan have invited me to stay for another day," the Omorr explained,"and I won't return in time to make surgical rounds. Jylyj mentioned that you
stopped in last night to look in on some of the patients, so I thought you wouldn't mind paying them another visit today."
I wondered exactly what the resident had said to the Senior Healer. "I have no objection, but your resident might."
Squilyp looked surprised. "Not at all. In fact, I assumed you and Duncan were off with Marel, so I wouldn't have signaled, if not for Jylyj's suggestion. He
would rather have you than one of the on-call Jorenian healers." Humor glinted in his dark eyes. "I think you have made another conquest, Doctor."
I thought the exact opposite, but I wouldn't find out what Jylyj's motives were by hiding in my quarters. "I'll be there shortly."
This time I put a pistol belt as well as my blade harness under my tunic, and strapped my forearms with the twin sheaths I had worn on the battlefields on
Akkabarr. Whatever Jylyj wanted from me, I intended to be prepared for the worst.
The Skartesh stood waiting outside the entrance to the surgical ward, as if watching for me, but greeted me in his usual reserved fashion and thanked
me for replacing Squilyp. His voice sounded as tired as I felt, and the weight of the weapons concealed under my tunic dragged at me, as if to condemn
me for my assumptions.
"We have two post-op patients just transferred from recovery," the resident said as we walked down the line of berths. "One male had a moderate
reaction to the anesthesia and is not yet lucid. With your consent, we should start with his case."
Jorenians rarely had reactions to sedation, but when they did, they could become combative. "Have you put him in restraints?"
Jylyj nodded. "We had trouble shifting him to the berth. I had to use all the nurses to hold him in place while I strapped him down."
The patient in question, an enormous male with serious internal injuries from a transport mishap, was semiconscious and trying to move despite the
restraints. As soon as he saw us, he began babbling nonsense and straining to lift himself away from the berth.
Much more of this and he would tear open his sutures. "Why didn't recovery administer neuroparalyzer?"
"They did," Jylyj said. "Three separate doses. It had no effect."
The only reason for that would be the presence of a counteragent. "Run a tox scan." I went over to the side of the berth and put my hand on the patient's
brow. "ClanSon, you must be still now. You are only making your wounds worse by fighting."
The male stopped moving and stared up at me. "Who are you?"
"I am Healer Torin. This is Healer Jylyj."
The white eyes shifted from my face to the resident's and back again. "Where am I? What are you?"
I realized too late that my Terran features and Jylyj's Skartesh countenance would seem strange, even frightening, to a patient in his condition. "You are
in HouseClan Torin's medical facility. We are the healers who are caring for you."
The male looked down at the scanner Jylyj was passing over his chest and fought wildly against the straps.
"ClanSon, you must be still," I began to tell him, but then one of his arms ripped free of the straps. I saw a huge blue fist coming at my face, turned
quickly and took the blow on my shoulder. The force of the impact still sent me flying across the next berth and into a storage unit, which collapsed under
me.
I winced, sitting up and reaching for whatever was stabbing into the back of my shoulder. I couldn't reach it, and my hand came away red with blood.
I looked over and saw that three nurses now surrounded the berth, holding down the patient while Jylyj reinforced the restraints and administered an
infusion. By the time I staggered to my feet, the patient was unconscious.
Jylyj came to me and saw the blood on my tunic. "You are injured."
"Something's stuck in my back." Wet warm inched down my spine, and I felt the familiar dizziness that accompanied rapid blood loss. "I'll get a nurse to
see to it. Check our patient for internal hemorrhaging. What knocked him out?"
"I don't know, but he's not bleeding inside. Jarn." Jylyj caught me as I sagged, and lifted me into his arms. He began issuing orders as he carried me
into a procedure room.
I found myself facedown on a treatment table. "You don't have to do this," I told the resident. "A nurse can clean out the wound. Go take care of the
patient."
"Must I put you in restraints?" He slit my tunic from hem to neck and pulled it aside. He didn't do or say anything for a moment, and then I felt blunt claws

trace a strap of my blade harness. "Why are you armed?"
"I'm always armed." I lifted my head and tried to look over my shoulder. "What's making me bleed?"
"A piece of alloy. Hold still." Jylyj brought a suture tray over to the table and cut away more of my tunic, exposing my right shoulder.
"Don't give me a local; they have no effect on me." I felt impatient as he scanned the wound. "Whatever it is, just pull it out and repair the bleeders. It
won't kill me."
"No, but it could paralyze you. One end has lodged close to your spine." Soft fur touched the back of my neck as he covered my face with a surgical
drape. "You must not move when I am removing it."
"I won't." I gripped the edge of the table with both hands. "Do it."
He enabled a suture laser, then his fur brushed my skin. The thing in my back slid sideways, and I took in a sharp breath as pain slashed across my
shoulders.
The extraction took only a few seconds, but it felt as if it took forever. My vision blurred, and I heard metal hitting a tray. The rawness of my wound turned
scalding hot as Jylyj went to work with the suture laser.
"I've found three bleeders," he told me as he worked. "None of them are serious."
"Right." I gritted my teeth as the smell of my own flesh being cauterized filled my nose.
To Jylyj's credit, he worked very fast, pausing only to scan the wound for debris before he irrigated it, closed it, and began to apply a light dressing.
"I don't need that," I told him, lifting my head under the shroud. "Take this thing off my face."
"Something's wrong." Blunted claws curled over the back of my neck. "Stay where you are."
"It's no cause for alarm." I could feel the edges of the wound shrinking, and knew he was watching it happen. "I heal very fast."
"That would explain why one of the shallow bleeders repaired itself." The clamping hold he had on my neck eased, became almost gentle. At the same
time, a deliciously warm sensation spread out over my back. "You're not Terran or Akkabarran. They don't heal like this."
"It's a long story." I didn't like the way my body was going limp. "What are you . . ." The rest was lost along with my consciousness.
When I opened my eyes some time later, I saw the ceiling of the procedure room. Jylyj had turned me over, removed the remains of my tunic, and
draped me with a modesty shroud. I saw him hovering, and glanced down at the sponge he was using to clean the blood from my neck.
"How long was I out?"
Dark eyes met mine. "Only a few minutes. Reaction to the blood loss, I think." He used a folded square of linen to dry my throat. "How are you feeling?"
I moved my injured shoulder, which felt vaguely sore but otherwise normal. "Much better. Tell me you did not signal my husband."
"I did not signal your husband." He lifted me into a sitting position, and I slapped a hand against the drape to keep it from falling away from my breasts.
That was when I realized what else he had removed.
I looked around the table. "Where are my blades?"
"I put them and the harness in the sanitizer." He brought me a scrub tunic. "They were covered in blood. So were your pulse pistols, but I cannot clean
those with this equipment."
"I will hand clean them later." I held the drape in place as I awkwardly worked the scrub top over my head. "What about the patient?"
The Skartesh removed the stained linens from the table. "He is resting comfortably."
I eyed him. "How did you manage that?"
"I infused him with karokain to neutralize the existing chemicals in his bloodstream." Jylyj helped me work my arms into the sleeves. "It seems prior to
his accident, he was taking neuromuscular stimulants."
"He has Satala Varena Syndrome." Jorenians suffered from few diseases, but very active males in midlife sometimes developed a dysfunction of the
nervous system that caused progressive deterioration of the muscles. "One of the drugs used to treat it is made from the primary counteragent for
neuroparalyzer. Have you--"
"I have him on an oxygen feed and will keep him under close monitor," Jylyj said, answering my question before I could finish asking it. He rested one of
his paws on my shoulder to steady me. "If his lungs begin to fail, we will intubate."
Being alone with the resident and the way he kept touching me made me feel uncomfortable, and I swung my legs over the side of the table. "He will
need to resume his medication for the Satala as soon as possible."
"I have scheduled the appropriate dosage to be administered as soon as he stabilizes. Let me help you." He put his arm around my waist as I moved
off the table, and frowned down at me. "I see some blood in your hair." He used his claws to move aside some tangles. "Did you hit your head?"
"I don't think so." This close to the resident, I could smell his scent, which was as warm and soft as his fur. There was something about it that reminded
me of the pungent herbs Reever sometimes used when he prepared food. I reached up to touch my scalp and feel for a wound.
"No." Jylyj caught my fingers and held them. "There is nothing there." He bent his head, bringing it closer to mine, and his breath touched my cheek.
"The blood must have come from the shoulder wound."
I went still as I felt him stroking his claws through my hair. "Jylyj, I will brush out my hair after I cleanse."
He made a vague affirmative sound as he brought a length of my hair to his nose and breathed in. The paw he held against my abdomen spread and
pressed against me.
"Doctor." I made my tone sharp and clear. "I'm fine now. I think we should go and complete rounds."
Jylyj raised his head to look into my eyes, and his teeth flashed. For a moment I thought he might try to bite me, until he removed his paws and stepped
back.
"Yes. Of course." He turned away, his back muscles rigid. "I will join you after I finish cleaning up in here."
I left the procedure room and went to the post-op patient who had hit me. The nurse taking his vitals gave me a concerned look.
"Healer Jarn, are you well? We were worried--"
"I'm fine." I scanned the patient, but the readings only confirmed everything Jylyj had told me. If anything, the patient's condition had improved
dramatically.
I didn't know what to think about what had happened between me and the resident in the procedure room. It reminded me too much of the time I had
been abducted by PyrsVar on Vtaga. After taking me to his desert hide-out, the alterformed Jorenian had made plain his intention to force me to become
his mate.
What Jylyj had done was far more disturbing. He had behaved almost as if he didn't realize what he had been doing--or couldn't stop himself. Even
more bewildering were my feelings of confusion and guilt. Had I done something to make him believe I would welcome such attentions from him?
PyrsVar had frightened me, but I had fought back and freed myself before he could force himself on me. I didn't know what to do about the resident.
Reever and I shared the same passion for each other, so I welcomed his touch. Aside from dealing with PyrsVar's lust, I had no other experience with
aroused males.
An Iisleg male could make use of almost any woman. The only reason I had not been used was because I had been taken in by the skela. Forbidden by
tribal law to touch the living, the dead handlers were never used by the men of the tribes.
To my knowledge, hardly any ensleg males were permitted to freely make use of their females. According to Reever, Terran females had to give their

consent before a male could couple with them, and some required marriage first. Jorenian customs were even stricter than that; they were obliged to
pledge their lifelong loyalty and fidelity to one female before they were permitted to couple for the first time in their lives.
Jylyj had not behaved like any other ensleg male I had met since living on Akkabarr. Still, after serving on Joren for so long, he had to know that he could
not help himself to any female he desired. From what Darea had told me, rape was one of the rarest and most despised crimes on Joren. Males found
forcing a woman to couple were not even given a hearing--they were immediately disemboweled.
I felt a sudden, compelling desire to get as far away from Jylyj as I could. "Who is the on-call healer for this shift?" I asked the nurse.
She checked her datapad. "It is Healer Atovea."
"Signal him and have him report to finish rounds with Resident Jylyj." I handed her the chart and walked quickly off the ward.
Once I returned to my quarters, I secured the door panel and stripped out of my garments. Reever could read my thoughts as easily as a display screen,
and if I kept dwelling on the incident he would eventually discover what had happened. Whatever the resident had or had not meant to do to me, I had to
stop thinking about it.
I spent the next hour in the cleanser, washing the blood out of my hair and Jylyj out of my thoughts.

Seven
The day of our departure from Joren arrived, and at dawn Reever and I reported to Torin Main Transport. We had kept Marel up late the night before,
saving our farewells for when she went to sleep, and did not wake her to accompany us to the ship. After I told him about the nightmares she had been
having, Reever thought it better that she not be there to see the ship launch.
"I know we have to do this, but I still feel as if I'm betraying her by leaving," I confessed as we walked to the lift to board the Sunlace. "Her dreams have
convinced her that I won't return this time."
"This is not the first time she has had such dreams," Reever said. "For years after the Jado Massacre, she would wake in the night, crying and calling
out your name. The nightmares didn't stop until I found you on Akkabarr."
We handed over our cases to the cargo master and entered the boarding lift. Reever held the gate open for a porter carrying a tall stack of slat-sided
containers. The Jorenian thanked my husband, grimacing because he could not use his hands to make the usual polite gestures, and braced himself
against the back of the lift.
I eyed the stack, which wobbled as the lift jerked into motion. I saw some t'vessna petals sticking through the slats, and Marel's voice rang in my ears.

In my dreams you're wearing your blades under your tunic, and there is a little purple flower in your hair. You hug me and kiss me good-bye, and
then I never see you again.
I swallowed against my dry throat. "Duncan, why are they loading plants onto the ship?"
"The Jorenians prefer their native foods over synthetics, so the Torin bring a select amount of edibles on board the ship," Reever said. "On long
sojourns, they even grow them."
I pointed. "They don't eat those."
"The t'vessna are kept in pots in the crew's quarters and common areas to improve the quality of the air. They are also the symbolic flower of
HouseClan Torin." Reever looked up and moved quickly to catch the top container as it tipped over and fell from the stack. Some of the contents spilled
out and were blown off the lift by the strong morning breeze.
"No," the porter groaned. "That was all the t'vessna. There is no time to collect more." He made an archaic gesture. "This is an ill omen for your
journey."
I glanced over the side to see the cascading shower of purple blossoms drift down on the head of the bewildered cargo master. "I'm afraid I cannot
agree."
At the entrance to the lower docking bay, a smiling duty officer gave us official permission to board the Sunlace . Reever helped the porter with his
burden, and then turned to say something to me.
When he only gave me an odd look, I asked, "What is it? Did you forget something important?"
"Yes." He pulled me into his arms and tilted my head up, burying his hands in my hair as he kissed me soundly.
"Oh." I grinned. "That was quite important."
He slipped one hand into his tunic pocket. "I am meeting Qonja at the survey lab to recheck the storage units. Why don't you come with me?"
"I should look in on medical first." I saw the concern in his eyes and lowered my voice. "I know you're worried, and the first hours apart from her are
always the most difficult for me. But I won't change my mind or jump off the ship. I promise."
"Good." He bent to kiss me again, this time on my brow. "Signal if you need me."
Squilyp had personally supervised preparing the medical bay for the sojourn, and left it in such a state of pristine perfection that I had nothing to do until
the rest of the medical staff arrived. I went next to the quarters assigned to me and Reever and unpacked our cases, but that didn't take very long, as
neither of us carried much in the way of possessions.
I did set a framed image of our daughter on the table beside our sleeping platform, and spent a moment examining her sweet face.
"As soon as we come back," I told the picture, "we are going to make a home for the three of us. You, me, and Daddy."
Reever and I had left the pavilion without bothering with a meal. I still had no appetite, but to stay busy I prepared a light meal for the men, packed it up
in some food containers, and carried it down to the survey lab.
I entered the lab's open door panel and looked around. Nalek had installed a massive amount of equipment, most of which I didn't recognize. I saw my
husband and Qonja standing inside a large, seven-sided plas chamber built in one corner; Reever appeared to be mounting a very large specimen
container on a console of some sort.
"Duncan? I've brought you two some food." Then I saw the glittering dark column inside the specimen container, and quickly put down the containers.
"Why do you have that black crystal in there?"
"It's the specimen we collected from the impact crater on Trellus. We need to study it, and use it for comparison with any new deposits we might find."
Reever came out of the chamber through a narrow gap between the plas panels, and after Qonja did the same, a shimmering wall of energy filled the
aperture. "We have already discovered some of its properties. The crystal may look solid, but according to our scans it is actually part solid, part
plasmoid, and part liquid. There is also a fourth, as yet unclassified, form of matter in the crystal's core."
"How can it be all those things and still look like a shiny rock?" I asked.
"For some matter, existence in a variety of states is possible," he told me. "Water becomes a gas at temperatures above one hundred degrees
Celsius, a liquid between zero and one hundred degrees Celsius, and a solid below zero degrees Celsius. If you drop ice into a server of steaming-hot
water, you can observe it in all three states."
I eyed the lethal mineral. "That is not made of water." "No. While gases, liquids, and solids are the three most common states, there are several others
that we have classified, and another hundred or so that have been proven theoretically possible. Matter in dimensional shift, for example, is temporarily
converted into a trimorphous solid by the phased energy that moves it from one reality to another." He nodded toward the chamber. "I believe a similar
factor is affecting the crystal's physical state."
I didn't care what it was doing; I wanted it off the ship. "What if it gets out of there?"
My husband shook his head. "Drefan provided the container. It's made of etched crystal, and once sealed it cannot be reopened."
I realized I was staring at the crystal and quickly averted my gaze. "You are putting a great deal of faith in a container, Duncan. That crystal is lethal.
Even looking at the light it reflects can be dangerous. You can't keep it out in the open."
"The container's shielding prevents any light refraction," Qonja told me, "and if it should fail, the drone response system Nalek Kalea installed will
immediately engage. The dimensional grating responds to any spatial distribution of matter."
I turned to my husband. "Explain this in words I can understand."
"The chamber is under constant monitor by a failsafe program. If the crystal's container breaks or is opened, the failsafe takes immediate action to
remove it from the ship." He gestured to various parts of the chamber as he spoke. "A probe programmed to fly into the nearest star will enclose the

crystal and its container as soon as the breach is detected. The probe will then be ejected from the ship through the chamber's airlock."
"We hardly know anything about the crystal or its properties, except that it controls, maims, and kills any living being that comes in contact with it," I
reminded him. "What if something goes wrong with your failsafe and the crystal contaminates the ship? How can we protect the crew?"
"Nalek designed this chamber with a buffer modified to remain in perpetual energy shift," Reever told me. "It will remain engaged for the entire sojourn.
Even if the failsafe measures don't work, the crystal cannot escape the chamber."
I still didn't like having it on board. "As soon as we're finished with the survey, I want that specimen dropped into the nearest star."
"I have no desire to begin a collection," my husband assured me as he removed a disk from his tunic pocket and turned away from me. At the same
time, something fluttered to the floor, and I bent down to retrieve it.
As I straightened, I closed my hand over it and said, "I have to report to medical. Excuse me."
Only when I was outside in the corridor did I open my hand and stare at what had fallen out of Reever's pocket. It had been crushed by a strong hand,
but I recognized it. Several containers of the same had fallen from the lift that morning, just before my husband had taken me in his arms and kissed me.
I remembered the odd look, the feel of his hands in my hair as he kissed me, and went to the nearest disposal unit.

In my dreams you're wearing your blades under your tunic, and there is a little purple flower in your hair.
I dropped the mashed thing in the intake receptacle and switched it on.

You hug me and kiss me good-bye, and then I never see you again.
Once the disposal had reduced the remains of the t'vessna flower to an organic mush, I vented the unit's contents into space.
An hour later, when the entire crew had reported for duty, I held a brief meeting in medical to introduce myself and become acquainted with my new
staff. Squilyp had given me a full complement of experienced nurses, three interns, and an orthopedic resident in her second year. Jylyj, however, was the
most experienced physician on staff, and with some misgivings I designated him as the Supervising Healer, which gave him the right to act as Senior
Healer whenever I was off duty or not on board the ship.
"Unless the sojourn requires us to do otherwise, we will work standard three-shift rotations," I told my staff. "As we have no patients at present, your first
assignment is to run diagnostic checks on all of the equipment. I know Senior Healer Squilyp likely had you do that before we left Joren"--I noted the wry
smiles all around--"but the stress of launching and transitioning has been known to cause random equipment malfunctions. We don't want to assume
everything is working; we want to be certain of it. Do you have any questions?"
One nurse lifted her hand in a polite gesture. When I nodded to her, she said, "Very little information on the oKiaf is available from our database, Healer
Jarn. Is there a comparable species we can study in order to better prepare for the jaunt down to the planet?"
"The Skartesh and the oKiaf possess nearly identical physiologies," Jylyj said, startling me. "You may access my medical records, or request data from
Kevarzangia Two. The physicians at the colony's free clinic have treated thousands of Skartesh refugees."
I didn't know whether to admire or suspect the Skartesh for recommending the medical staff contact K-2 for more information on his species while
making his own records available to them. He either had nothing to hide or had hidden the truth so well he presumed they would never discover it.
Before I could comment on his generosity, a voice from the bay com panel announced that the ship would be transitioning in five minutes.
Like my former self, I had trouble staying conscious during the interdimensional jumps the Jorenians used to shorten the length of their sojourns. I ended
the meeting and asked a nurse to accompany me to one of the isolation rooms, where I occupied a berth and had her restrain me.
Jylyj appeared and looked down at me. "What are you doing?"
"Sparing myself some bruises." At his blank look, I added, "I often lose consciousness during ship transitions. This spares the crew much of the trouble
involved with reviving me."
"Have you ever determined why you faint during transition?" he asked, taking out a scanner.
"Squilyp and I have both tried, to no avail. The Omorr thinks it has something to do with my brain chemistry." I frowned as he initiated a cerebral scan.
"We have not yet transitioned, so that is useless."
"The technology the Jorenians use for transitioning first releases a modified phase-energy pulse to create a dimensional aperture." He switched on a
pen light and checked my pupils. "You may be sensitive to the effects of the pulse."
I blinked. "No one else faints or sees the ship turn into a swirl of color."
"No being undergoing a dimensional transformation preserves its sense of spatial relation." He spoke absently as he scrolled through the scan.
"I read no signs of injury or infection, and yet your white-cell count is elevated." He scanned me a second time. "It is still increasing."
"My immune system has been enhanced to respond more aggressively than the average Terran's." I felt the vibration of the Sunlace's engines growing
stronger, and closed my eyes as I braced myself. "Whatever happens, don't code me."
I felt Jylyj bending over me a moment before the sickening slam of the ship's transition took over my senses and sent them into overload. My stomach
dropped as the unpleasant sensations of reality bending and twisting around me grew unbearable. I felt something else--a touch on my face--before the
stress and nausea rendered me unconscious.
When I next awoke, I still felt the vibrations of the engines, although now they were subsiding. The Skartesh no longer stood beside the berth, but had
been replaced by one of the senior nurses.
She flinched with surprise when I asked her to release the restraints. "Your pardon, Healer Jarn. We were told you would likely remain unconscious for
several hours."
My brow felt very warm, and my stomach clenched slightly with a remnant nausea that vanished as soon as the nurse released me and I sat up. "How
long has it been?"
She glanced at her wristcom. "Three minutes, forty seconds since the ship completed transition."
I had been healing faster than my former self; perhaps I was adjusting to transition better. I got up, walking slowly until I felt sure I had regained my
equilibrium, and then washed the sweat from my face at the scrub unit. As I used a linen to dry myself, I remembered Jylyj's comment about my white-cell
count and performed a quick blood scan. All of my counts read at normal levels.
White cells did not vanish in a few minutes; once created by the body they remained present and active in the bloodstream for days. Either the Skartesh
had made a mistake or he had lied to me.
I glanced around the room and asked the nurse, "Where is the scanner that Healer Jylyj used on me?" She handed it to me, and I checked it for the last
set of readings.
The display showed nothing. The unit's memory core had been erased.
The Sunlace's interdimensional jump had moved the ship from Joren to a region just outside the Saraced system located on the opposite side of the
quadrant. It would take another three days' travel to reach oKiaf space, where we would hopefully make contact with the local authorities and obtain
permission to conduct a survey on-planet.
I used the time to work with the staff in medical and prepare the supplies needed for the jaunt to the planet.
Hawk proved invaluable to me as he spoke of tribal medical practices and made suggestions on how the survey team should dress and conduct

themselves around the oKiaf. I conducted several meetings with the rest of the staff, during which I had him relate what he knew of tribal medicine.
"In most primitive societies, healing the sick and injured among the tribe is performed by a single male or female who serves as the group's shaman,"
Hawk explained during one such meeting. "The oKiaf have been exposed to advanced technology, so it is unlikely their healers have remained dependent
on native treatments and religious rituals. Yet these will still be important to the people, and may be incorporated with what technology they continue to
use."
Herea, the second-year intern, grimaced. "Without detailed knowledge of their rituals and homeopathic medicines, anything we do is likely to offend
them."
"Their exposure to offworld practices has probably resulted in a degree of tolerance that other primitives with no outside contact would not offer," Hawk
assured her. "The important thing to remember is to go slowly and carefully with them, and always be respectful of non-harmful practices. Casting
fragments of bone next to patients or painting their bodies with native pigments may seem pointless to you, but such healing rituals are often tightly bound
to the tribe's belief systems and sense of identity. As such, they give reassurance, and can even have a positive effect on the patient's recovery time."
I discovered the Skartesh had very stringent restrictions on the circumstances under which their healers--like the Iisleg before the rebellion, always
male--could treat female patients. They required certain preparations to preserve the female's modesty, and never completed their work without the
female's mate or a male family member present.
Jylyj also provided some helpful information by relating the observations he had made during his visits to oKia.
"It is the practice of each member of the tribe to care for their own minor injuries or illnesses," he said. "They expect privacy for this and will not allow
you to treat them."
"So, in essence, every oKiaf is a healer." I thought about this. "What if they are too ill or badly injured to care for themselves?"
"If their condition is more serious or they are rendered incapacitated by it, the chieftain will summon an alleviator," the resident said. "He treats the
incapacitated tribesman until they have recovered enough to take over from him."
"Is this alleviator a trained physician?" I asked.
"Not exactly," the Skartesh said. He spoke slowly now, as if choosing his words more carefully. "He has some skill with healing, but his primary purpose
is to provide practical care until such time as the patient improves enough to care for himself."
"Does every tribe have an alleviator?" Hawk asked.
Jylyj shook his head. "The alleviator who treated the tribe I visited also served ten other tribes."
Although the resident sounded as if he knew what he was talking about, I had the sense that he wasn't being entirely truthful. "How are such males
chosen?"
"I cannot say." He avoided my gaze.
I had not confronted Jylyj about what had happened during transition or the readings he had deleted from the scanner, but I had been keeping him under
close watch.
The Skartesh preferred to work with the male staff, that much was obvious, but to the female staff he remained courteous and cooperative. Off duty he
stayed in his quarters and rarely ventured out. I never saw him making use of the recreational areas or sharing a meal with others in the crew galley where
most of the Jorenians congregated.
In fact, the only times I saw Jylyj voluntarily interact with others were at the medical staff meetings or in the bay during shift change. He proved to be an
effective supervisor who ran medical as efficiently as Squilyp, and made a point to personally ensure that all of the daily tasks assigned to his
subordinates were completed properly and on time.
To keep the staff from growing bored, and to give myself something to do, I conducted several trauma and surgical simulations in the environomes. The
preset programs, which had been designed by Squilyp and based on actual emergencies that had occurred in the past, simulated everything from single
operations to full-scale disasters.
One morning, after Herea and I were finishing a complicated spine injury case, one of the nurses signaled to indicate a real patient had reported to
medical with compound fractures of the radius due to an accidental fall.
"This one is yours, so go and perform the initial assessment," I told Herea. "I will join you as soon as I clear and reset the program."
Pleased to be placed in charge of the case, the intern started for the nearest lift, but then she stopped and turned to me. "Healers at my level are
required to be supervised at all times by a licensed practitioner."
"You just restored function to all six of this training torso's limbs," I pointed out. "You know what you are doing. Unless you want me to hover over you
while you examine the patient?" She made a swift negative gesture. "Then what are you waiting for? Go. Be a doctor."
She grinned and hurried off.
Squilyp would have been scandalized by such an obvious violation of the rules, but I thought ensleg medical practice too often focused on protocols and
not enough on the needs of the patient. Herea was the most sensible and coolheaded of the healers I had been assigned; she had repeatedly
demonstrated a natural gift for diagnosing and treating all manner of skeletal disorders and injuries.
"The Senior Healer rarely uses the Tingalean torso for training purposes," a male voice said from behind me. "Their spine cases are among the most
difficult of the reptilian species to treat and repair."
"I cannot see the sense of practice if it is not difficult." I looked over my shoulder at Jylyj. "You finished your shift only an hour ago. You should be
sleeping."
"I was interested to see how the intern performed during the simulation," he admitted. "I watched you both from the observation alcove." He came to the
training torso and examined the repairs Herea and I had made. "Interesting choices. Somewhat risky, as well. I would have started at the fourth lumbar
and removed the bone fragment lodged in the wall of the left lung."
"Relieving the compression injury at the primary vertebrae restored circulation to the rest of the spine, and preserved the greatest degree of limb
function." I gestured toward the monitors. "Had the patient shown any signs of respiratory distress, I would have attended to repairing the lung."
"That is not standard procedure," he said. "Being able to walk is not as important as being able to breathe."
"You should check the database for cases of Tingalean paralysis," I advised him. "You will find that the post-op infection rate triples, and most die within
the first year from complications related to immobility. Being able to walk, at least for Tingaleans, is what keeps them breathing."
His expression became skeptical. "How often do you think a Jorenian healer like Herea will operate on a Tingalean patient?"
"Now that the war is over and travel restrictions have been lifted, Herea may choose to join the crew of a HouseClan exploration vessel. Tingaleans and
several other reptilian species often serve on Jorenian ships." Belatedly, I recalled that a reptilian species--the Hsktskt--had destroyed his homeworld
during the war. "If you have some personal objection to treating coldbloods, you should make it known to the Senior Healer when we return."
"I was called to healing from birth. I knew what it would be when I answered." He came to stand behind me. "You were born to it. You know what it is to
look upon a wounded enemy and only see their pain and suffering. You operated on that female with the grenade in her belly, knowing that she was sent to
kill you."
Was my ClanBrother trying to use the resident to gain my confidence? "Who told you such a thing?"
"I read the case file and did some research on the ordnance." He shifted closer. "Given the facts, it was the logical conclusion."

"You are mistaken." He stood too close to me now; I could feel his breath on the back on my neck. "Am I blocking your view?" Before he could answer, I
stepped aside and went around the training torso, putting the surgical table between us.
Jylyj braced his paws on the edge of the projectors, causing part of the holographic torso to disappear. "You do not care for me."
Did he expect me to confirm or deny it? "I don't know you."
"They talk about you, the Jorenians. Some think you are cold because you were stranded on that ice world too long." His dark eyes remained locked on
my face. "I should tell them how foolish they are not to see beyond the mask you wear. But that would require me to discard my own."
I didn't like knowing the staff discussed me in my absence, any more than his tale carrying. "Be careful, Skartesh. You do not know me at all."
"I think I do, better than most. And you have sensed it from the day we met." He straightened. "When you tire of this charade, sadelenne, come to me. I
will show you everything you deny yourself."
In that moment, I at last understood. This was not about female subjugation or prejudice. Jylyj desired me. I knew nothing of Skartesh mating practices,
but to pretend I did not know what he was about might be in his eyes a kind of encouragement. Although I would probably offend him deeply, I had to make
my feelings plain, right now.
"I will never come to you. I love my husband, and there is no other for me." I switched off the simulation projectors. "Excuse me."
I did not look back as I left the environome, but by the time I reached medical I felt as if I had run all the way there.
The encounter with Jylyj left me feeling uncomfortable and somewhat at odds with myself. I said nothing about it to Reever, and kept the Skartesh out of
my thoughts whenever we were together. I had never tried to actively hide anything from Reever--to attempt to do so when he could read my thoughts
whenever he liked was pure idiocy--but I worried that he would misconstrue what had happened.
Nothing had happened. Nothing would.
Knowing that Jylyj desired me also heightened my awareness of him, and I sometimes caught myself watching him or looking for him. That was the
reason I discovered the strange fascination the Lok-Teel had with the Skartesh.
Like the rest of the staff, Jylyj made regular use of the Lok-Teel to clean the decks and equipment in medical. The sentient mold, first discovered on
Catopsa by my former self, lived on any sort of unwanted organic waste and excreted an astringent antiseptic substance that cleaned whatever surface it
touched, making it an almost perfect housekeeper. The specimen Cherijo had brought from the slave depot had reproduced pro lifically, creating enough
offspring to provide dozens of little helpers for every Jorenian medical facility and star vessel that desired them.
The mold was cooperative, even friendly in its own way, so everyone liked it. The Lok-Teel, however, had never shown a preference for any of us--or so I
assumed until the evening I saw five of them scurrying along the corridor to join another ten waiting outside Jylyj's quarters.
Instinctively, I held back and watched, as I knew from the hour that the Skartesh would soon be exiting his quarters to report for his shift. After a few
minutes the panel opened and he emerged, stopping as he saw the Lok-Teel waiting for him.
Jylyj did not kick them aside or step on them, but looked down until they seemed to sense they were blocking his path and drew back out of his way. He
then walked down the corridor toward medical, and the fifteen Lok-Teel followed him.
I did the same, taking care to hang back so that I could observe this oddity without giving away my presence. At the entrance to medical, Jylyj gave the
secured entrance his voice print to gain access, but stood to one side as the panel opened. Only after all fifteen of the Lok-Teel following him passed over
the threshold did he go inside.
"That is a very enigmatic expression you wear," Qonja said as he joined me. "What do you out here?"
"Have you ever noticed the Lok-Teel following anyone?" I asked him.
He shook his head. "To be truthful, I rarely notice the Lok-Teel, much less what they do. Whom have you seen them following?"
"The Skartesh, Jylyj," I said. "He seems to attract them."
"Naturally. They love eating his fur." Qonja grinned at the surprised glance I gave him. "Have you never noticed how much he sheds? He is like your cats
that way."
"Those small beasts are not mine." I had not seen a single dark hair in medical or anywhere Jylyj went, however, so what Qonja said explained their
behavior. "How goes the work in the survey lab?"
"Your bondmate is a relentless taskmaster, especially with himself. I think he means to discover everything about the black crystal before we reach
oKia." He paused, and then asked, "How does Hawk in medical?"
"When I am not working him relentlessly, he's been teaching all of us a great deal of what to expect with the oKiaf." I noted the relief that passed over
Qonja's face. "No one has treated your Chosen with anything but friendship and respect."
"That is because there are no Adan on the Sunlace." His mouth took on a bitter twist. "Would that I had been born to the House of Torin."
"Reever is meeting me for the evening meal interval," I told him. "Would you walk with me there?"
As we made our way to the galley, I told Qonja a little of what it had been like leaving Akkabarr behind.
"I disliked the ways of the Iisleg, especially in how they treated females, so I felt eager to leave them behind. Then I found myself surrounded by you
Jorenians, and your smiles and laughter and friendliness. And the touching." I grimaced. "All you people do is touch. It is as if you cannot keep your twelve
fingers to yourselves."
That startled a laugh out of him. "I suppose we do."
"In my eyes, all of you were too loud, too boisterous, and far too familiar. You did nothing properly. By the end of my first week on the Sunlace, I became
convinced that I had made a terrible mistake, casting my fortunes in with what had to be the most annoying, insufferable ensleg species in existence." I
waited for his laughter to end, and added, "You terrified me."
His mirth subsided. "We are nothing like the Iisleg, but why would we frighten you?"
"I disliked my people, but I knew their ways. Even while I was made to live as an outcast among them, the skela followed the customs and practices they
had brought with them from their iiskar. With your people, I was welcomed and made free, but I never knew what next to expect." I halted outside the galley.
"You and Hawk can return to Joren and find a way to live among your people. Your bond may forever make you an outcast among them, but you know what
to expect from them. Out here, among those who are your ensleg, it will be different. Perhaps you will find them annoying and even aggravating. But
among them, you will be free."
He sighed. "That is the truth of it."
"I will tell you a secret." I leaned close and lowered my voice. "Every time I think of returning to Akkabarr, and everything known to me, I imagine Marel
growing to womanhood there, and the desire dies at once. For they would do to her what was done to me. When you miss Joren, when you think of the
Adan, imagine what they could do to Hawk."
He nodded slowly, and made an elaborate gesture of gratitude before he glanced into the galley. "Reever is not here yet. That is strange. He told me
before I left the lab that he was meeting you in a few minutes."
I used my wristcom to signal my husband, but there was no response. I went to the wall panel and requested Reever's location.
"He's still in the lab." I frowned. "He never forgets to meet me."
The first time my husband had seen the black crystal on Trellus, the dangerous refractive qualities had mesmerized him and nearly caused him to walk

into a crater. Despite the assurances both Reever and Qonja had made about how well the crystal was guarded, I didn't like my husband being left alone
with it.
I used the wall panel to signal the terminal in the lab. "Duncan? Please respond."
"Jarn," his voice said at last, although some sort of static crackled over the sound of it. "Would you signal Qonja and ask him to come back to the lab?
I'm having trouble with the com units."
A deep, resonant vibration accompanying the static interference made my ears ache, but Qonja didn't seem to react.
"What trouble?" I waited for a reply, but the resonant static increased, blocking out the sound of Reever's voice before the relay terminated. "Did you
hear that, beneath the static? That thrumming sound?"
"I cannot say that I did." Qonja touched my forearm."I will go. I am sure it is only an equipment malfunction."
Just as I had the feeling it wasn't. "I'll come with you."
I didn't hear the resonant sound again until Qonja and I entered the survey lab. There we found Reever on his back under the main control panel. I
rushed over, only to stop as my husband's hand appeared and groped for a tool from the repair kit sitting beside the console.
I knelt down. "What do you need?"
"The smallest impact wrench." When I placed it in his hand, he took it and said, "Thank you. What are you doing here? I thought you were working an
extra shift."
"No, I left at shift change and went with Qonja to the galley to meet you." I frowned. "Why did you think that I was working late?"
"That is what I was told when I signaled medical to tell you I would be delayed." He hammered on something, and then eased out from under the
console and stood.
"I will check with the staff to see who wishes to overwork me." The thrumming sound made my ears itch. "What is making that noise?"
Reever stood up and turned to me. "What noise?"
"Never mind. Qonja couldn't hear it, either." I glanced at the plas-sided chamber, and the black crystal in its shielded specimen container. Although the
opaque housing muted its dark glitter, its presence still made me feel uneasy. It looked larger, too, which alarmed me. "Is that thing growing?"
"It cannot," Qonja assured me. "The interior of the chamber is a vacuum that is kept at absolute zero."
"It looks bigger to me." I turned to my husband. "Have you the means to measure the size of it?"
"I can run a comparison scan, but it is as Qonja says. There is nothing it can use to add to its matrix and expand its dimensions." He switched on the
console and tapped a few controls.
I walked closer to the chamber and studied the crystal from all angles. Although the men didn't hear the resonant sound, and the crystal hung motionless
in its vacuum, I felt convinced that it was responsible for the sonic interference.
"You are correct, Wife." Reever said, his voice tight. "The crystal's matrix has increased in size. It is growing."

Eight
"This cannot be." Qonja went to the console to examine the readings. "There must be an error in the original readings."
"The atoms in the crystal matrix are active," Reever said. "They are vibrating about their equilibrium positions with amplitudes comparable to lowtemperature plasma phasing."
The Jorenian muttered something under his breath. "That sort of thermal agitation is not possible, not at absolute zero."
"It is bigger than it was," I put in, "so it has to be doing something."
"It may be displacive restructuring," Qonja said. "Stable silica has a rhombohedral structure in low-temperature form. Heat it above five hundred
seventy-three degrees Celsius, and the atoms interconvert into hexagonal symmetry." He saw my blank look, and explained, "That would mean it is
changing shape because of the temperature, not growing."
"I would agree, but we still haven't identified the interatomic forces responsible for the black crystal's cohesion and stability," my husband said. "Until we
do, we cannot assume it is restructuring."
"We can if we look at the cause instead of the effect," Qonja insisted. "Shifts in temperature and pressure are the most common factors involved in an
enantiotropic polymorphic transformation. We have placed the black crystal in a zero vacuum. It is not unreasonable or unusual to observe a structural
response to the change in environment."
Reever shook his head. "Its atoms are neither ionic nor covalent. They're not intercompositional, and don't resemble any known matrix. It may look like a
crystal, but I assure you, it is something else entirely."
I left them to debate their theories and drew closer to the plas chamber. The impact crater we discovered on Trellus had been solidly paved with black
crystal, I recalled. Trellus was a dead, frozen, airless rock of a planet; nothing could live on its surface without protection. I had assumed that the crystal in
the crater had been deposited there, carried by some ancient meteor that had slammed into the surface.
What if it had not landed, but instead had grown there?
I turned around to face the men. "How fast is it growing?"
Qonja consulted the console. "According to the scans, its matrix increases one millimeter every thirty hours."
I did some calculations. "If it continues to grow at this rate, it will breach the specimen container in ten days. Do you agree?" He nodded reluctantly.
"Duncan, can you enable this failsafe of yours manually?"
"We have an override," he said. "Before you tell me to eject it from the ship, I want you to think about something. We have never observed the crystal in
a state of change. This may be the only opportunity we have to do so under controlled conditions, and what we learn could help us combat the threat it
poses to all life."
"Your controlled conditions will be useless in a few days." I knew he was right, but I didn't have to like it. "It will have to be closely watched, Duncan, in
the event this restructuring or growth or whatever it is becomes more rapid. You and Qonja cannot do that by yourselves."
"I'll ask the captain to assign a security officer to the lab during our off-duty hours." He came to stand with me and held my hand. "Thank you."
"You are welcome." I tugged him toward the console. "Now show me how to engage the manual override. I want to know exactly how to feed this
wretched thing to the stars."
We arrived on the edge of oKia's solar system and assumed a stationary position, from which Xonea planned to send a remote signal requesting
permission to enter oKiaf space. Reever and I joined him in communications in the event the authorities needed more information about the nature of the
expedition.
My ClanBrother never had the chance to send the signal, for an alert came from the command center indicating that the Sunlace had been intercepted
by two well-armed patrol vessels.
"This does not bode well," Xonea said as we relocated to command. "Duncan, were you able to locate one of your allies in the area?"
My husband nodded. "Last night. Uorwlan should be arriving shortly to meet us."
Xonea took the helm and studied the scans of the patrol vessels. "Both of these ships are scout-class vessels, but they're outfitted like attack strafers.
They're also carrying drop mines and have large cryotanks attached to both sides of the fuselage."
"Drop mines are only used for short-range air-to-surface bombardment," I said. "Why would they use them out here?"
"To blow large holes in a vessel," Reever said. "Once they breached the hull, they'd drop the cryotanks inside and trigger them to flood the ship."
I knew of only one species whose troop carriers would be susceptible to such a bizarre attack. "They're armed to fight League and Hsktskt invasion
forces. But why? Peace has been declared."
"Declared by the Hsktskt and the League," Reever amended. "The oKiaf obviously think otherwise." He turned to Xonea. "If they have stopped using
League technology, they may no longer use signal translators. Without direct contact with the oKiaf, my ability to interpret will be limited."
"We already have a native interpreter," Xonea said, nodding toward Jylyj, who at some point had come into command and now stood to one side.
Xonea sent a standard greeting to the patrol ships, adding a phrase in universal at the end they could easily understand. One of them responded
almost immediately, but thankfully used a translation-enabled signal.
"This is Sentinel Wilnas of oKia," the patrol commander said. "You have entered restricted flight space. State your reasons for doing so."
The image of a pilot appeared on the console display. For a moment the face seemed so familiar I thought it Jylyj, until I noticed the lighter fur color and
longer, narrower features. The eyes, too, appeared different; with light-colored irises containing a central oblong pupil. Colorful polished beads and small
pieces of carved wood hung from the pilot's intricately woven mane, through which many streaks of white hair were scattered.
The pilot wore a flight suit, but this, too, had been altered in unique ways. What appeared to be a length of spotted skin had been sewn to the shoulders;
gleaming dark green and brown stone beads had been arranged on the stiff collar in what I guessed was his rank insignia.
"I am Captain Xonea Torin from Joren. My crew and I are conducting geological surveys of inhabited planets in this region. We collect data only and
intend no harm or intrusion."
As Xonea gave the oKiaf official a carefully worded version of the truth, I noted that he didn't mention me or Reever, which I thought a prudent decision.
The oKiaf might have been able to keep offworlder ships out of their space, but offworld signals had to be detected before they could be jammed. If they
didn't care to have contact with outsiders, they probably wouldn't hesitate to hand two of them over to a bounty hunter.
After Xonea had finished explaining our mission, Sentinel Wilnas did not respond. Xonea didn't seem troubled by this.
"A patrol officer has only a limited amount of authority under specific conditions," he said. "We are not League, and we are not here to conduct trade or
deliver passengers. Our mission does not require us to come in direct contact with the oKiaf. He is likely signaling his command to request new orders."
"If we detect black crystal on their planet," I said, "I will need to examine some of the natives."
"We will do as much as they will permit, Jarn." Xonea turned back to the console as a new signal came over the channel.

"Captain Torin, you will take your vessel to these coordinates," Wilnas said, and relayed the data. "When you reach the security station there, dock at
the off-loading bay. There your ship will be boarded, and you will be questioned."
"Why do they want that?" Xonea murmured, and then signaled back with, "Sentinel, I am happy to answer any questions you have now."
No reply came over the channel, and a moment later the patrol ship terminated the relay.
Xonea eyed the display. "This could be a ploy to capture us."
"They will not fire on you unless you ignore an order or attack them," Jylyj said. "They prefer to avoid violence with offworlders."
"Then why have they enabled their weapons?" Xonea countered.
Jylyj glanced at the display. "The oKiaf avoid violence, Captain, but from outsiders they have come to expect it. They are preparing for the worst."
"If reporting to this security station is standard procedure," my husband said, "Uorwlan will confirm it."
My ClanBrother nodded. "Send a signal to the trader. Do not encrypt it; they will be monitoring everything we do, and we do not want to appear
secretive."
Reever went to the com officer's console and sent the signal. The trader responded soon after that.
"The oKiaf maintain security stations at four points along their system grid," Uorwlan said. "All ships entering the system are required to first dock at the
nearest station for inspection. You needn't be concerned about it, old friend. They will ask a lot of questions and inspect every part of the ship, but they
wish only to see for themselves if you are telling the truth."
The signal was audio only, so I couldn't see the trader's face, but the voice sounded soft and beguiling, as if they were discussing something far more
personal and intimate.
"How long before you reach us?" Reever asked the trader.
"We've had some engine problems, so we won't be there until tomorrow." Uorwlan said something else in a language that the ship's translator did not
recognize, and then terminated the relay.
"What did that last part mean?" Xonea wanted to know.
Reever gave him a bland look. "Nothing but a farewell."
Xonea was almost convinced by Uorwlan's reassurances, but still performed a remote scan of the security station. The results showed it to be an
artificial satellite, three times the size of the Sunlace, with an array of powerful defensive weaponry, ten docking bays, and a small fleet of patrol vessels.
"It seems an excessive amount of security to guard a planet of primitives," Xonea said as he contemplated the scans.
"In the past both the League and the Faction have occupied this system," Reever said, "and Skart was destroyed by the Hsktskt. If that happened in
your solar system, how open would you keep your borders?"
My ClanBrother's expression darkened. "I wouldn't bother to board or question unexpected arrivals." He looked at my husband. "This trader's
information, you are sure it is reliable?"
Reever nodded. "I freed Uorwlan and a dozen other Takgiba from slavery. She is bound to me by a life debt. She would not lie or lead us into a trap."
She. So this Uorwlan was female, knew my husband well, and owed him her life. Already I didn't like her. Still, what Reever had done in the past was of
little concern to me, and the life debt practically guaranteed the Takgiba's loyalty.
"I agree with Duncan," I told Xonea. "We should go to the station."
The two patrol ships escorted the Sunlace to the oKiaf station, where Xonea performed another remote scan before maneuvering alongside the dock.
Only when our engines were powered down did the patrol ships depart.
Reever and I accompanied Xonea to meet the boarding party. The oKiaf sent a group of ten armed security officers along with four station supervisors
to inspect the ship. At the boarding platform airlock, Jylyj pulled me aside.
"oKiaf females are not permitted to serve in the defense forces or leave the homeworld," he said."Males are not accustomed to dealing with women in
official capacities, and your presence here may cause discomfort."
I shrugged. "I rarely make anyone feel comfortable."
"Know that the males will not address you directly, and they will be offended if you speak to them," he warned. "They may even ask that you be
removed. If that happens, do not object. It is not personal."
"An Iisleg female who does not obey a male is usually beaten, often until she dies," I told him. "I think I will tolerate being sent from the room."
After arranging crew escorts for the oKiaf security detachment to take them around the ship, Xonea invited the station supervisors into a nearby
conference room.
Reever sat on my right, and Jylyj on my left. The resident drew almost as much attention as my husband and I did, and was the first person the oKiaf in
charge of the boarding party spoke to.
"I had not expected to meet one of those lost to us," Colonel Pegreas said to Jylyj. He ducked his nose down and twisted his head to the right and left
before raising his eyes. "You are very welcome here, brother."
The resident bowed his head in a similar fashion. "This son of Rushan is grateful to have made the journey, Colonel."
"We have heard your people have endured much living among the outsiders." Pegreas spared Reever a dark glance. "It is hoped that you are being
treated fairly by these outsiders."
"I am." Jylyj touched the front of his tunic. "They have provided work, shelter, and kinship. I have no complaints, but much praise for their kindness to
me."
Pegreas seemed to relax a little. "What of your people, Brother?"
"The faithful were briefly deceived by false prophets, but were saved by allies on K-2," Jylyj told him. "The sons of Rushan could not remain on the
colony there, but the aquatics offered sanctuary on one of their moons."
"So it is true. We had heard rumors, of course, but given the nature of that world . . ." Pegreas shook his shaggy head, causing some of the beads
woven in his silver mane to clink together. "Is that why you have come to dwell with these strangers? To escape that wet horror?"
"I have answered my calling," Jylyj said flatly. "That is all you need know."
The colonel seemed a little taken aback by the resident's tone, and for a moment I thought Jylyj had offended him. But Pegreas recovered quickly and
inclined his head.
"As you speak, Brother, so I hear." He turned to give Xonea a far less friendly look. "We have had some limited but favorable contact with Jorenians in
the past.Your people also broke with the League before the war. Those are the only reasons I permitted you to come here."
"We are grateful for your consideration, Colonel," Xonea said. "Our mission is an important one, and the data we collect here may save many lives on
other worlds."
Pegreas didn't seem impressed. "You mission means nothing to the oKiaf. We no longer concern ourselves with what happens outside our borders."
"If this black crystal has infected any of the worlds in your system, it will poison your species and possibly cause mass extinction in the future," Xonea
said. "I would think that to be of great concern to the oKiaf."
"How do we know you are not attempting to mine the crystal for use by the Allied League as a weapon?" Salanas, one of the other supervisors,

demanded. A smaller, darker male, he had sharp teeth and eyes so light and cold they seemed made of alloy.
Xonea kept his tone calm and reasonable. "Our ship is not equipped as an ore hauler, and we have no treaty with the League."
"Your people have served on their ships." Salanas gestured toward me and Reever. "You even brought two of them with you."
"You are mistaken," Xonea said. "Jarn and Duncan are citizens of Joren, not the League." He turned to Pegreas. "You have had contact with our
people. You must know that we have never been warmongers or invaders. One of our ClanLeaders, Teulon Jado, negotiated the terms of peace that
ended the war between the League and the Hsktskt."
"After the League massacred his kin and sold him to slavers," Pegreas replied, evidently unmoved. "While Joren is famous for its neutrality, we know
that the Jorenians have never been a particularly forgiving people. How do you explain the Jado's actions?"
Salanas sniffed. "They smell to me of cowardice."
Xonea's eyes narrowed, but it was Jylyj who said, "Perhaps you have had your nose buried too long in your own affairs."
Salanas's expression turned to one of astonishment, and again Pegreas gave the resident a startled look.
"I am Jarn of Akkabarr, and I served the Iisleg as a battlefield surgeon during the rebellion," I said before the oKiaf could respond or anyone could stop
me. "Raktar Teulon was my general."
"There," Salanas said, making a rude gesture toward me. "He favors females. Is that not indicative of his own character?"
"When our rebels prevailed over the Toskald, Teulon had the means to wipe out their civilization and send thousands of ships against the League and
the Hsktskt armies," I told the supervisor. "He set aside the revenge he wanted--and surely deserved--and sought instead to bring peace to all the worlds
involved in the conflict." I regarded Salanas. "That, Supervisor, took more courage than you could possibly understand."
"You see?" Salanas turned to Pegreas. "They use females to speak for them. She even questions my intelligence. Is this not proof enough of their
perversions?"
"I don't care if females have no voice among your people, Colonel," I told Pegreas. "I will not hear my general being slandered by your officer and
remain silent. His ignorance needs correction."
As Jylyj had predicted, the oKiaf colonel didn't care for me addressing him any more than Salanas had; the pelt around his skinny muzzle drew into a
faint snarl. But as he looked into my eyes, his expression eased.
"The honor and actions of Teulon Jado will not be questioned by the oKiaf." He said the words while looking at Xonea, but they were meant for me.
"Supervisor Salanas will keep his opinions to himself."
Salanas opened his mouth as if to argue, saw Pegreas's cold eyes, and fell silent.
"What has happened to oKia?" Jylyj asked, sounding impatient now. "The war is over. You have no valid reason to close the borders and repel
outsiders now."
"We lost more than Skart and your people to the war," Pegreas said. "When the Hsktskt invaded, they raided our cities and killed thousands. We drove
them out, but not before they leveled Hafila, Matuk, and Asani."
Jylyj went rigid. "They attacked the Elphi?"
"Indeed. They murdered the Highest One and every member of his tribe before the eyes of the people, hoping to instill fear and submission to their will."
The Skartesh sighed. "Fools." He glanced at the rest of us. "The Elphi is the elected leader of the oKiaf people. If he is harmed or killed by anyone, his
chieftains swear blood vengeance. It is a death vow, and cannot be revoked until vengeance is taken."
"Our chieftains summoned the tribes from the valleys and the mountains, from the ice lands and the forests. We surrounded the beasts and we
slaughtered them until they ran to their ships and fled oKia." Pegreas paused as if to savor the memory. "After our world was free of the invaders, the
chieftains did not elect a new Elphi. They led the people back into the wilderness, where we could fight on our terms. But the beasts, cowards that they
are, never returned, and so it was decided that the people should remain one with the land."
"You abandoned all of your cities to live in hiding?" Xonea sounded perplexed.
"We were not hiding, Jorenian." Salanas bared his teeth. "We did that in the cities, in the structures built by the League, smothered by their cursed
technology. When we returned to the land, we rediscovered the freedom we had sacrificed. We took back what we had lost."
"You must not have abandoned everything," Reever said. "Or you would not be manning these security stations or flying patrols around your system."
"My men and I volunteered to live on the stations and maintain constant patrols in order to protect the tribes," the colonel said. "So we have, since the
end of the war."
Jylyj gave Pegreas an odd look. "None of you have ever returned to the homeworld? Why?"
Pegreas pulled up his sleeve and showed a clean-shaven place on his forearm with burn scar tissue that formed a three-sided symbol. To the rest of us,
he said, "We are the last of the Elphian guard. As we once dedicated our lives to guarding the Elphi, so we now live here in space to watch over oKia."
Xonea glanced at the viewport. "I would think you could do that just as well on the planet."
The colonel replaced his sleeve. "When we left the League, they sent spies to our world to infiltrate the people. When we caught them, they claimed they
meant to stop our 'cultural regression' by persuading our chieftains to return to the cities and take up their ways. But what they truly wished was to
convince our young men to again serve in their militia."
"It's said that the oKiaf were some of the best intelligence officers in the League," Reever said.
"We were, and our resignation from the League did not sit well with them. They infiltrated our homeworld and made a nuisance of themselves again and
again, until it became apparent stronger measures had to be taken," Pegreas continued. "We Elphian took charge. We had the League spies send for
supply vessels with the materials we needed to build the security stations. They gladly gave us all the patrol ships we requested, thinking that we would in
turn hand over our men. They were quite surprised when we finished the preparations and sent them to Quadrant command with orders to stay out of our
space."
"We burned our words into their cringing back hides, so there could be no further misunderstanding." Salanas uttered a rough sound of sour
amusement. "Even so, they still sent more."
"They kept coming until we destroyed the three of their ships." Pegreas didn't sound especially happy or remorseful, only matter-of-fact. "In the end, that
was the only message they understood."
"We have no desire to meddle with your people or your politics," Xonea said. "Our mission is to perform orbital and surface scans to detect the
presence or absence of black crystal. Given the tasks at hand, we have no reason to engage in contact with the oKiaf, although my medical staff would
appreciate the chance to scan the natives for crystal contamination."
"You can scan me if you must," Salanas snapped.
"Supervisor, your offer is appreciated," Reever said, "but by your own admission you have not resided on the planet for some years, and there are no
signs of the crystal on board this station."
Pegreas seemed to be thinking it over. "How many do you wish to send to the surface?"
"We can keep the survey team small in number." Xonea watched the older male's face. "Colonel, I give you my word, we will respect any restrictions
you impose on my ship and crew."
"I will allow five to go down to the planet by the end of this day," the colonel said at last. "You must dress in native garments and take only a small

amount of equipment, which will be first inspected by my security officers. You may remain there for three or four days. At the end of that time, you will
return to your ship and leave our space."
That was not nearly enough time, and I was about to say so when I felt Jylyj touch the back of my hand. I glanced at him, and he shook his head slightly.
A security officer came in and briefly conferred with Pegreas in a low voice before leaving again.
"My men have finished inspecting the ship," the colonel said. "You appear to be everything you say that you are. Nevertheless, the ship will remain here,
at the station. You will permit a security detachment to stay on board and monitor your crew's activities as long as your survey team is on the planet."
Xonea stood and made a formal gesture of acceptance. "We thank you, Colonel."
I managed to wait until the supervisors left the conference room before I confronted my ClanBrother. "How are we to conduct a thorough planetary
survey in just three days, with one team on the planet and the Sunlace kept under guard here?"
"I would suggest you do it quickly," Xonea said, his mouth hitching.
"What they said does not make sense." I rubbed the back of my neck. "Why prohibit all offworlders from visiting oKia if their dispute is with only
members of the League?"
"The League frequently uses alterforms to infiltrate hostile or dangerous species," Jylyj said, startling me. "Doubtless they have encountered them in the
past."
"Pegreas will not let us near oKia unless we accept his conditions," Reever said. "I suggest we do so. Xonea, scan as much of the surface as you can
from here. I'll take a remote transceiver down to the planet and contact Uorwlan from there. The oKiaf trust her and her crew; perhaps she can help us
negotiate for better terms and more time."
"Captain, with your permission, I will go and speak alone with Colonel Pegreas," Jylyj said. "He is sympathetic to my people, and I may be able to ease
some of his fears."
Xonea nodded. "Do what you can, but do it swiftly. If I have judged the length of their days correctly, the survey team must leave for oKia in four hours."

Nine
I went with Reever to the survey lab to retrieve the equipment we would need on the planet and to check the black crystal. Qonja was waiting for us, and for
once had a little good news--or so I thought at first.
"The growth rate of the matrix has decreased dramatically over the last hour," the Jorenian told us. "The amount of fluid in the center inclusion has
tripled, and the surfaces are showing distinct flaws. It's almost as if entering oKiaf space has in some way damaged it."
I went over to the plas chamber with Reever. The crystal no longer glittered, but looked old and cracked. The hollow space in the center of the shaft had
bubbled outward toward the crystal's surfaces, and the cloudy liquid inside seemed to be moving in a sluggish swirl.
Reever scanned the container. "The atomic structure is losing cohesion."
"Hydrated silicates contain water in channel intersections," Qonja said. "The fluid is only minimally bound in the crystal matrix and can be leeched from
it through interstices. Perhaps it is the same with the black crystal."
"Such water inclusions don't destroy the structure of the crystal when they are expelled or replaced," Reever said. "The black crystal is not acting like a
zeolite molecular sieve." He gave it a thoughtful look. "It may be cannibalizing itself."
"What would make it do that?" As far as I knew, nothing had changed except the position of the ship. "Are we being exposed to some form of radiation
unique to this part of space?"
"None that registered on our sensor arrays," Qonja answered. "If the deterioration continues, in a few days all that will be in that container is a puddle of
black sludge."
I saw Reever frown, and asked Qonja if he would go and help Jylyj and Hawk prepare for the jaunt down to the planet. When we were alone, I touched
my husband's arm. "What is it?"
"I don't think it's degenerating," he said slowly. "This change has all the signs of a thermal disturbance, but there is no heat source; no vibration to cause
the rotational motion of the liquid."
I thought of the resonant sound I had heard that no one else could detect. "What if the disturbance is a highfrequency signal or sound wave of some
sort?"
"Even if we couldn't hear it, it would still register on our equipment. I did check when you said you heard that sound, but it was not detected at all by the
monitors." He set aside the scanner and brought me over to the console, where he pulled up a set of scans showing the crystal as it had been. "I made
these scans yesterday, when the crystal was still increasing in size. The readings indicated the inclusion fluid was composed of a plasmoid substance
that contained no known elements."
"A liquid made of nothing?" It didn't seem possible.
"Here are the readings from the scan I just made now." He downloaded the data from the portable scanner and put them up on the display beside the
old readings. "The liquid now shows a growing concentration of the black crystal's atoms. But they are not binding to each other. They're floating in a
suspended state. That's why the liquid appears clouded."
I studied the two images. "So it is as Qonja says, and the crystal is deteriorating from the inside."
"We know the crystals can survive extreme pressures, temperatures, and radiation exposures, or they wouldn't be able to travel through space. What if
the crystals are more like the seed pods or spores of a botanical life-form? They may be able to remain dormant for long periods of time--millennia,
perhaps--until the conditions are right for them to awaken and germinate. Then the crystal breaks itself down into individual atoms. Atoms that can grow
like seeds."
"But why now?" I glanced out the viewport at the blackness of space. "Nothing has changed on the ship. You haven't warmed the container or tried to
stimulate the crystal, have you?"
"No, but we've just entered a solar system with an inhabited world." Reever met my astonished gaze. "Jarn, I don't think traveling into oKiaf space has
damaged the crystal. I think proximity to oKia has caused it to germinate."
I shook my head. "If that were true, then bringing the crystal to Joren would have done the same thing. It did not change while you kept it on the
Moonfire."
"Not if the awakening process takes a significant amount of time. Bringing it to Joren may have only started the process." He came and looked out at
the brown-green planet the ship was approaching. "Or there is something on oKia that is stimulating it that was not present on Joren."
That could be a hundred thousand different things, from the gravitational field around the planet to the radiant energy emanating from its sun. "If it is . . .
germinating, as you say, and all of those atoms will grow and become new crystals, how long can we hope to keep it contained?"
He returned to the console and checked the readings. "The process will be completed in seven days."
"We should destroy it now." I thought of how suspicious the oKiaf had been. "The oKiaf will be monitoring everything we do, won't they?"
My husband nodded. "If we attempt to destroy it here, they may misconstrue our actions, especially if they retrieve the probe before it can fly into their
sun."
If Pegreas retrieved the probe, he would surely open it. "We should never have brought it on the ship."
"I promise you," Reever said, "as soon as we leave the system, I will destroy it."
"If you don't, I will." I couldn't stand to look at the deadly thing another moment. "I'll meet you down in launch bay."
On my way to medical, I encountered Herea, whose cheerful face wore an uncharacteristic scowl.
"Healer Jarn," she said, making a quick gesture of greeting. "Is it true that the captain is not permitting any females to go to the surface?"
"No, for I am going," I said. "The oKiaf have only allowed us to send a team of five. Were there room for more, I would have you with us."
"It still does not seem fair that the Skartesh and that crossbreed are permitted to go." She gave me a guilty look. "Your pardon, Healer. I mean no
disrespect. It is just that . . . this is my first sojourn away from the homeworld. I am very disappointed."
"Jylyj is the only member of the crew who has already visited this world," I told her. "I would take you and leave Hawk behind, but I need an experienced
healer to run things here while we are gone." I put my hand on her shoulder. "Should anything go wrong and the oKiaf patrols attack the Sunlace, I am
depending on you to keep the crew alive. You have reviewed your trauma protocols, have you not?"
"Five times." She hesitated, and then asked, "Think you they would attack us?"
"They are very suspicious, heavily armed males who already don't like us being here, and they have attacked other vessels in the past." I gave her a
grim smile. "Should they try anything, I have no doubt the captain will respond in kind. Such battles often result in many casualties among the crew. You
may have your hands full."
"We will see to their needs." She stood a little straighter. "I am honored by your trust in me, Healer."
I accompanied Herea back to medical, and took a few minutes with her to brief the nursing staff. Rather than issue orders, I instructed the nurses to
follow Herea's instructions, and turned the briefing over to her.

Before I left, I leaned close to the intern and murmured, "You may do as you wish, but I would advise you have them run trauma drills while we are gone.
It will keep them alert and well prepared for any real casualties. That, and it allows you to shout at them now and then, something I've always found helpful
in stressful situations."
Herea nodded, her eyes glowing with amusement, and then turned back to continue the briefing.
I went to find Jylyj and Hawk, who were in the supply room. They had packed as many field supplies as could fit in the small cases we were being
permitted to carry down to oKia; Qonja was just finishing rigging each case with shoulder straps.
As Qonja and Jylyj left to load the rest of our supplies on the glidecart, I went through one pack, squeezed in a few small hazardous-specimen
containers, and then tested the weight of it by slinging it onto my back. "Good. We should be able to carry these without difficulty." I glanced at Hawk's
wings. "With the exception of those of us who can fly."
Hawk grinned and showed me the waist and arm straps affixed to his pack. "I told Qonja to use a front sling, but he thinks I will not be able to take off
from the ground with it hanging from my neck."
"You didn't have a problem snatching me off the shockball field, and I weigh more than that pack." I reached under my tunic to adjust my blade harness,
and then saw Hawk's face. "Forgive me, I'll do this in private."
"No, it's not that." He gave me a searching look. "You remembered."
"Remembered what?"
"The day I took you from the field."
"It was the first time I ever saw you fly." My belly tightened, and then I understood his reaction. "No. Forgive me, I misspoke. It was the first time Cherijo
saw you fly. You and I did not meet until some years later."
Hawk didn't let it go. "Jarn, can you see that day in your memory?"
I could, although I didn't want to admit it. Then I seemed to slip into a trance. "It was very bright. There were people, so many people, screaming at me. I
stood on strange grass and held a silver sphere, the shockball, between my hands. It had been rigged to kill Duncan." I looked up at him. "By my brother."
He nodded slowly.
"You jumped from the top of the place, and your wings ripped your garment apart, and you flew down to me." I pressed a hand against my head, which
now felt as if I were whirling around in a fast circle. "I think I'm going to be sick."
Hawk grabbed me to keep me from falling, and helped me over to the disposal unit. He supported me with one arm and held my hair back as I vomited.
When I had emptied my belly, he wiped my face clean. "I will call for Herea."
"No." I took the cloth from him and wiped the tears from my eyes before I blew my nose. "Duncan saw it from the field. He gave me the memory of it.
That is how I know." I took a deep breath and forced a smile. "Sometimes it is difficult to think of myself as two people. Forgive me, Hawk."
"Don't apologize." He seemed afraid of me now. "Jarn, are you sure you should go on this jaunt? No one would object if you chose to stay behind and
rest."
"Do you know what Cherijo would say to that?" My smile twisted. "I do. She wrote it in her journals: 'I can rest when I'm dead.' This, when she knew she
was made so that she might live forever."
"I think she knew she would not. Perhaps that was why she fought so hard to save the lives of others." Hawk touched my cheek. "As you do. None of us
know how much time we have left. Does Duncan know about these shared memories?"
"No." I felt stricken. "Hawk, please don't tell Duncan about this. Not now."
"I won't, if you will agree to tell him when the expedition is over." I nodded quickly. "One more thing." Hawk removed one of his bead necklaces and hung
it around my neck. "Wear this for me."
"It is beautiful." I looked at the small, gray-blue stones, and saw streaks of other colors glimmering in them.
"The beads are made of Terran moonstone," Hawk said. "My grandfather believed the gods cast them down to earth whenever it rained, to remind us
that we cannot have rainbows without a storm." He picked up our packs. "Now come. The others are waiting for us."
I tucked the beads under the collar of my tunic, where the cool weight of them lay against my aching heart.
The Elphian did not allow us to take one of the Sunlace 's launches to the planet, but flew us there on a station shuttle. The vessel had been built to
transport more cargo than passengers, but our seats allowed us to see a little through one small viewport beside the loading platform panel.
"I was able to persuade Colonel Pegreas to take us to one of the more populated lands in the eastern mountain region," Jylyj said. "We may interact
with the natives, as long as we do not interfere with them."
"I would like a definition of interference," Reever said.
"With the exception of medical scanners, we are not to use any of our devices or equipment in their presence. We are not to talk about politics, other
species, worlds, or cultures. And while we are on the planet, we are subject to and must obey tribal law."
"We don't know what tribal law is," I pointed out.
"I have some knowledge of it," the Skartesh said."The most restrictions will be placed on you, Healer Jarn. As a female, you must not directly address
any male unless he has first spoken to you. Nor can you examine any male without me attending. It should also be made clear immediately that you belong
to Linguist Reever."
I rolled my eyes. "So it will be like Akkabarr, without the beatings and the ice."
"Oh, there are plenty of snow and ice in the mountain regions," Jylyj assured me. "This is their summer season, however, so the daylight temperatures
should remain tolerable."
"It seems pointless for Pegreas to have given these instructions," Qonja said, "for he has no way to know what we do on the planet."
"I believe he will," the Skartesh replied. "Not all of the surviving Elphian left the planet. They live among the tribes, and no doubt will be keeping close
watch on our activities."
"There it is," I said, seeing the rim of the planet appear in the viewport.
oKia's surface was a swirling mottle of dark red, green, and brown, liberally salted with white patches indicating snow-covered areas. As we grew
closer, I noted the rough, uneven ranges of mountains, some of which extended the length of the planet.
"No oceans," Qonja murmured. "Is there any water on the surface?"
"oKia has many lakes, primarily in the valley regions," Jylyj said. "They are forbidden areas and the people do not dwell near them."
"Are the oKiaf as hydrophobic as the Skartesh?" I asked.
"They share a similar aversion, but for different reasons. The ancient tribes believed they came from water, and used to sink the bodies of their dead in
the lakes to return them to their birthplace. The oKiaf now bury their dead, but the lakes are still considered sacred." His gaze became shuttered. "The
oKiaf do not swim, so when a member of the tribe chooses to end his life, he often jumps from a cliff into a lake and drowns himself."
The station shuttle easily traversed the upper atmosphere, and when the distorting streaks of heat outside dissipated, I saw a conglomeration of linear
shapes and roads that comprised one of their cities. The lower we descended, the bigger and more detailed the city grew. The total absence of people,
lights, and movement within the structures made it seem ugly and empty; little more than a neat pile of containers discarded by an uncaring hand. I thought

the roads and passages between the buildings were made of white stone, until we dropped enough for me to see that they were blocked by snowdrifts,
some as tall as the building rooftops.
As soon as we entered the lower atmosphere, the shuttle pilot flew away from the city and up into the mountain range beyond it. There he chased a line
of peaks, weaving in and out of the tallest before he slowed and used the com to tell us to prepare for landing.
"My orders are to leave your team near the Parrak erchepel," the pilot said. "Theirs is one of the oldest settlements in the region, and their chieftain,
Dnoc, once served as a city administrator. He will deal fairly with you."
I glanced at Jylyj. Such generosity seemed odd, especially after Pegreas and his men had shown such hostility and resistance toward us. What had the
Skartesh done to convince the Elphian supervisor to make so many concessions?
The station shuttle landed on a wide, flat plateau that sloped down an incline to a series of terraced stone shelves that reminded me of the steps
leading up to the main hall at HouseClan Torin's pavilion. The shuttle pilot engaged the cabin's biodecon controls, effectively decontaminating all of us
before he opened the hull doors.
Dry, cold air immediately swept in to fill the cabin. My cheeks and nose chilled, my eyes teared, and still I could have groaned with pleasure. As lovely
as the warm, perfumed air of Joren was, I had missed the cold.
Jylyj stopped each of us to check the native garments and footgear we had changed into before boarding the shuttle. He adjusted the belt of twisted
strips of hide that cinched in the waist of my long shirt, moving the knotted ends to rest on my hip.
"You should take down your hair," he suggested. "It will make you look more like the women of the tribe."
"The wind out there will knot it more tightly that this belt." I sighed and removed the clip, and then remembered how I had once woven the heavy length
into cables. That would keep it from becoming tangled. "Are oKiaf females permitted to braid their hair?"
"They are, although you should wear it in a single braid." He tugged on one strand in a teasing fashion. "Wearing two means that you seek a mate."
I looked into his dark eyes and saw nothing playful there. He stood too close now, and when I glanced down I saw him winding a piece of my hair around
his claws.
This had to stop. "I have a mate," I told him, and tugged my hair free.
"I will braid it for you," my husband said, stepping between us. "Jylyj, Hawk needs assistance with his leggings."
I watched the Skartesh reluctantly move away, and saw Reever's eyes had turned dark. "What is it?"
He leaned close as if he meant to kiss my cheek, and said in a low voice, "I don't like the way he looks at you, or touches you."
An ensleg female would have likely taken offense, but I only felt relief. "Neither do I. I am trying to discourage his interest. Perhaps you can assist me
with that."
Reever nodded and glanced over at the other members of the team before moving around me and lifting my hair with his hands. Deftly, he divided it into
three parts. "I would rather be alone with you to do this."
Duncan's fascination with my hair and his love of grooming me had become an integral part of our intimate times, and I smiled to myself. "Someone will
have to unbraid it later."
My husband wove a loose braid before tying it off at the end. As he adjusted the back of my collar, his fingers touched the necklace of beads Hawk had
given to me to wear. "This is one of Hawk's prayer necklaces."
"He gave it to me to wear for good luck," I said, uneasy now. "I could not refuse such a gift from a friend."
"No, you cannot." Reever took my arm. "Stay close to me, Jarn. I don't want you out of my reach while we are on this world."
I had no intention of straying far from his side, but the harsh note in his voice made me look up at him. "Don't worry, Osepeke. Everything will go well."
It was only after we left the shuttle that I wondered what sort of prayer went along with Hawk's necklace.
Following the directions relayed to us by the shuttle pilot, we left the plateau and walked down the stepped incline until we reached a crude path winding
out of sight among a thicket of trees. I had seen trees before, both on Joren and in the images from some of the stories Reever downloaded to Marel's
reading pad, but these did not resemble any of those.
Each tree had exposed root systems that rose from the dark red soil and formed precise right angles to the trunks, of which there were a minimum of
three for each tree. The trunks themselves soared high above our heads, where they divided and spread out in formed branches covered with bunches of
thick, dark purple leaves and long, oval seed pods.
"These are heartwood," Jylyj said, touching one of the trunks. "The tribes use them for kiafta supports and to sustain the cooking fires. They burn very
slowly."
On Akkabarr we burned methane in our heatarcs, so the thought of setting a tree on fire seemed bizarre to me. "What are kiafta?"
"Temporary shelters the oKiaf dwell in on the land." Jylyj sniffed the air and pointed toward the path. "The erchepel lies in that direction, on the other
side of the thicket. I will go ahead and present myself to the men on watch." He trotted along the path until he disappeared into the trees.
We followed the path at a more sedate pace, keeping alert as we made our way through the thicket. In addition to the heartwood trees, I saw many
other types of plant life, from orange and green pools of frilled spikes to dense thatches of pale green shoots, the ends of which were adorned with cupshaped blooms filled like servers with green liquid.
Reever tried to name some of them for me, but even he stopped and stared at one plant, a single wide pad of blue from which sprouted hundreds of
tiny white berries. He scanned the berries before picking one and sniffing it.
"What does this remind you of?" he asked, holding it to my nose.
I breathed in. The scent of the berry was unexpectedly dark and rich, and reminded me of my favorite Terran beverage. "Coffee."
"According to my readings, they're safe for us to consume. If they taste as good as they smell, we should be able to steep them." He gathered several
handfuls and placed them in the pouch he wore on his belt.
The heartwood trees thinned, and then we passed through the last of them and into an open clearing. I stopped as soon as I saw Jylyj on his knees in
front of two native males. He held his paws behind his back and his head bowed, which alarmed me until one of the males spotted us and said
something.
Jylyj rose, turned, and walked back to us. "They have sent for the chieftain, who is out hunting," he said as soon as he had rejoined us. "Until he arrives,
we will be taken to a place of safety."
"We are not in any danger, are we?" Qonja asked, reaching unconsciously for Hawk's hand.
"They are concerned with the tribe's safety, not ours," Jylyj explained. "We will not be badly treated,but no one will speak to us until the chieftain gives
his consent."
I didn't like the idea of being herded off somewhere and held prisoner, but Pegreas had made it clear we were to follow tribal laws. This might even be
some form of test, to see if we would.
"Leave your packs here," Jylyj said as we started toward the men. "We can carry nothing into the erchepel yet."
"Some of the instruments in my pack can kill if used in ignorance," I said. "Will they be searching through them?"
"No. They won't be touched." He gave me a sharp look. "Remember to keep your eyes down, and do not try to talk to any of the men."

If Jylyj meant to intimidate me, he failed. I was not afraid of this place. For the first time since the end of the rebellion--no, since coming to
consciousness on the blood-stained ice--I did not feel strange, clumsy, or wrong. Everything made sense, from the scent of the air to the shifting of the soil
under my feet. I drank in the colors of the sky, the sound of the wind. When Reever brewed the white berries he had found, I knew they would be more
delicious than any coffee on Terra. For here on this world that I had never seen, among people who were not my kind, everything around me put me at
ease.
I felt as if I had finally come home.

Ten
The two men on watch split apart to flank us on both sides. Both carried hunting and skinning blades hanging tucked into series of loops sewn along the
upper sleeves of their garments, which, like those the Elphian had given us, were made of soft, cured animal hide. Each also held a spearlike weapon
with a pronged end carved of wood. Embedded in the twin shafts of the prong end were dozens of blackened, sharp-looking thorns.
Although the design of it was unfamiliar to me, the sturdy fashioning of the weapon and the wide space between the prongs made sense. Its primary
use was likely to pin down something and hold it in place while the tribesmen used their long, sharp claws for the kill. If thrust like a blade into a body, the
prongs would inflict two deep, penetrating wounds, while the barbed thorns would inflict even more damage as the weapon was jerked free.
The tribe came out of their shelters and many light eyes watched us as we were marched over to one side of the settlement. I found it difficult to keep
my head down and avoid eye contact, especially with all the attention we were drawing, so I tried instead to look at the objects in the camp. The tribe's
kiafta, made of enormous purple-and-gray-striped hides stretched over a framework of poles, numbered in the hundreds. The tall, oblong shelters did not
stand alone, but had been built in groups of three with covered, open-sided lattices leading to and from each shelter. Airy-looking twists of pink and gold
vines grew on the lattices, but instead of flowers sprouted large, dark red globes with smooth hulls.
Intricate native symbols had been somehow carved into the darker strips of the shelter hides in long columns; as I passed close to one such hide I saw
the symbols were actually carefully denuded spaces in the short, dense hair of the hide.
"What do the symbols mean?" I murmured to Jylyj.
"I don't know," he whispered back. "I cannot read their language."
In the center of the encampment stones had been stacked in a sprawling spiral, in the center of which a well-tended fire blazed. Embers lined each of
the spirals curving away from the center, and stone pots hung from simple frames steepled over the coals. Thin, pale pink smoke rose from the burning
heartwood, and colored the cold air with the faintly sharp but not unpleasant scent of hot resin.
I couldn't see what the tribeswomen tending the pots were cooking, but I saw one of them toss a handful of dried stalks into a pot and stir them into the
contents.
Our guards stopped at an area marked off from the rest of the encampment by rows of dark stones, and enclosed by a three-sided lattice covered with
the pink and green vines. A plain hide with the center cut away covered the area. I saw the reason for the hole when I spied the small fire that had been
built beneath it. Around the fire were large, hide-covered, flat stones that appeared to be seats of some sort.
"This is where we are to wait for the chieftain," Jylyj said. "Remain here. As your scout, I have to first inspect it to ensure that it is suitable."
I watched the Skartesh as he walked inside the structure and made a circle around the fire. He knelt and sniffed at the ground several times, and then
straightened and looked above at the interior of the hide. Only then did he gesture for us to join him.
I didn't have to look at the tribesmen to see their approval. Obviously, these rituals were important to them, and by observing them Jylyj showed both
knowledge and respect.
The fire kept the interior space quite warm despite the open-sided lattices. Acting on instinct, I waited for the men to sit down around the fire before I
joined my husband.
"Put your hand on the top of her head," Jylyj said to Reever. "It shows approval and possession."
Duncan stroked the crown of my hair. "I could become used to this."
"So could I." I resisted the urge to cuddle up against him, and glanced at the Skartesh. "How long do you think we'll be kept here?"
"The men on watch sent runners for the chieftain. Hunting parties never go farther than a two-hour run." He glanced up through the smoke hole to study
the sky. "They should return by midday."
I noticed Hawk kept looking back at the encampment through the entrance to the enclosure, his expression intensely curious. "Are the people here like
the Native American tribes on Terra?" I asked him.
"As some of them were in ancient times, yes," he said. "The tribe lives literally off the land, in harmony with nature. The animals they hunt feed the
people, while their hides make shelters and clothing." He turned to Jylyj. "They do not cut down the trees for firewood, do they?"
The Skartesh shook his head. "It is against custom to harm living trees, so the firemakers take only fallen or dead trees, and cure them in seasoning
racks. The custom is practical, too, as fresh heartwood doesn't burn very well."
Hawk nodded thoughtfully. "Tribal customs usually come about as a response to some aspect of the environment. The ancient Hebrews on Terra had
very strict laws forbidding the consumption of certain meats. Centuries later, scientists discovered that parasites dangerous to humans commonly
infected the prohibited animals."
The sound of a polite cough distracted me, and I watched a tribeswoman enter the enclosure. She moved in a curious hunched fashion, holding her
head down and cradling a basket of food against her belly. She tentatively approached us, set down the basket, and drew back. Her light green eyes met
mine for a moment before she turned and left as quietly as she came.
Jylyj picked up the basket and examined the contents.
"Journey food," he said, picking through the oddly shaped items. "It's commonly the first meal offered to those who have crossed great distances. They
know we have come a long way to be here."
"How can they assume that? From our appearance?" Qonja asked.
"Likely they have an Elphian watcher in the erchepel." He offered the basket to Reever. "It's safe to eat," he added when my husband hesitated.
"Until our scanners are returned, Jarn and I will use our rations." Reever passed the basket to Hawk without taking anything from it.
Hawk and Qonja both sampled some of the oKiaf journey food, and seemed to enjoy it, although the Jorenian pronounced it very rich and filling.
"It must be very high in calories and nutrients," the Jorenian said, examining one of the blue globes from the basket. "I thought the oKiaf were mainly
hunters. Do they grow this?"
"There are some tribes who travel to planting grounds in the warm season and cultivate quick-growing crops, but most of the people rely on hunting.
The women are skilled gatherers, however, and have many ways to preserve foods. They often keep the tribe from growing hungry during the long winters
when game is scarce and hunting parties return with nothing to show for their efforts."
One of the men on watch came to the enclosure and pointed first at Jylyj and then at Reever while uttering some terse words.
"The chieftain has returned and will receive us," the Skartesh said.
"Why me?" my husband asked.
"I told them that you are our leader," Jylyj said. "I am being allowed to accompany you to serve only as an interpreter."
I touched my husband's hand. "Be careful."
He nodded and left with Jylyj and the oKiaf tribesman.
A short time later, the female who had brought the basket of food slipped inside, and with her eyes cast down came to sit beside me. I couldn't fathom

why until Hawk leaned close.
"Jylyj said females are never left alone with males they are not mated to," he said. "I think she is here to act as your chaperone."
I suppressed a chuckle. "If only I could explain to her how safe I am in your company."
Qonja laughed out loud at that, startling the tribeswoman, who glanced at him before covering her mouth with her hand. That was something I
recognized; Iisleg females did the same when they were amused by something a male did or said.
The Skartesh had said I could not speak directly to the men of the tribe, but I saw no harm in trying to communicate with this female.
I caught her gaze, gestured toward myself and said, "Jarn."
"Trewa," she responded, pointing to her breast. She darted a glance at the men.
"Qonja," I said, indicating the Jorenian, and then pointed to the crossbreed. "Hawk."
"Jarn, Qonja, Hawk," Trewa repeated slowly. She seemed pleased to know our names. "Antea hsfar, Jarn." She made a sweeping gesture toward the
sky, and then brought her hand down to the ground. "Dyalmatak."
"I wish Jylyj was here," I said, smiling helplessly at the other female and shaking my head slightly to indicate that I didn't understand her words.
Trewa picked up a twig, moved back, and began scratching marks in the red soil. She drew five figures, an oval shape, and a triangle before she
looked at me expectantly.
Hawk studied the drawing. "Our survey team, what might be a ship, and one of their dwellings, I think."
"The triad seems to be a very important symbol to them," Qonja observed. "If you noticed when we were brought in, everything in the encampment is
grouped in threes." Another tribesman, one we had not seen before, came inside the enclosure and spoke to Trewa. She nodded, ducking her head as
she rose. The male gestured for us to do the same.
Trewa stayed with us and walked beside me until we stopped before the three largest kiafta in the encampment. With another shy look she unwrapped
from her arm a coil of square green beads interspersed with short slivers of pale, smooth wood and pressed them into my hand before hurrying off.
The tribesman made a motion indicating we should wait, unfastened part of the kiafta's hide covering, and stepped inside. A moment later, Jylyj
appeared.
"This is the chieftain's place, which he shares only with his mate and his children," he said in a low voice. "It is a great compliment to be invited here. It
seems we have impressed the tribe with our manners."
"Should I wait outside?" I asked.
He shook his head. "The chieftain is particularly interested in you, Healer. Just stay by your husband."
We followed him into the dark interior of the shelter.
Given the oKiaf's nomadic culture, I did not expect to see any sort of furnishings. While the inside of the kiafta was not crowded, there were large stones
arranged to serve as a table, seats, and what I thought were sleeping platforms.
I wondered why the oKiaf would bother to use such heavy objects for furnishings when I saw the bases of the stones, which were weathered by time and
use and stood deeply embedded in the soil. From the way it looked, I imagined that the stones had been used by many generations of oKiaf and left in
place. Each chieftain must have come to this same place and erected his shelter over the stones.
Reever stood at the back of the kiafta, partly shadowed by a draped piece of hide. Next to him the chieftain, a tall and proud-looking oKiaf, stood in
silence. They didn't look at us.
"Sit here." Jylyj indicated a row of seating stones, and stopped Hawk from sitting beside me. "That is Reever's place."
Hawk nodded and moved down the row. I sat and looked at the ornament Trewa had given me so I wouldn't be tempted to stare at the chieftain.
"That is a renatak ," Jylyj said. "Did one of the women give it to you?"
I nodded. "The female who brought the food. Should I wear it?"
"Yes. I will show you." Jylyj uncoiled the length of beads and wound it around my wrist, turning it one way and then another until the coils hugged my arm.
"Why did she give it to me?" I asked as I admired it.
"It is a fertility object," Jylyj said. "She wishes you to become pregnant." At my wide-eyed look, he added, "Being with child gives the female higher
status among the tribe. In a sense, it is her way of saying that she wishes you well."
My immune system made it almost impossible for me to have any more children, so the explanation left me feeling a little depressed. Still, I intended to
thank Trewa the next time I saw her. "What are the words a woman uses to thank another for a gift?"
As Jylyj told me, Reever came out of the shadows and sat down beside me, taking my hand in his. He glanced at the bracelet but said nothing, and I
realized why when the chieftain came out and began speaking in oKiaf. At the same time, Jylyj translated his words for us in a low voice.
"I am Dnoc, made leader of the Parrak erchepel. It is through our lands that you walk and on our bounty that you feast."
Reever turned to Jylyj. "Tell him we are here to look for a crystal that can cause the people to fall ill. Ask him if we may have his permission to survey the
land here."
Jylyj spoke rapidly to Dnoc, who nodded and walked around our group to look at each one of us. He then spoke to the Skartesh at length.
When Dnoc had finished, Jylyj said to Reever, "The chieftain has been in contact with the Elphian. He will allow us to stay in their erchepel for the night,
and in the morning he will give us a guide."
Reever shook his head. "We don't need a guide. We can use our equipment."
"It is not an option," Jylyj said. "There are several places where outsiders are not permitted to go. The guide is not to show us around as much as to
keep us from trespassing on prohibited grounds."
"Why are these places off-limits?" Qonja asked.
"I cannot say." The Skartesh glanced at the chieftain. "The oKiaf do not discuss such matters with outsiders."
While the men were talking, Dnoc came and crouched in front of me. He turned his head and muttered something to Jylyj.
"The chieftain wishes to speak to you, Healer Jarn." The Skartesh moved beside us. "You may look at him."
The chieftain had piercing blue eyes, one of which was surrounded by six parallel scars that formed deep grooves in his black fur. So many beads and
small wood carvings had been added to the dozens of braids in his mane that his entire head seemed to sparkle with light.
He spoke at length, and only when he finished did Jylyj translate the words.
"Dnoc has been having vision dreams of an offworlder female marked by ice and fire," the Skartesh said. "So have some of the other men of the tribe.
The oKiaf believe their dreams are portents, so they were not surprised to see you. He is gratified to know that you are a healer. He believes that is also a
sign."
Dnoc reached out and hooked a sharp claw under the moonstone beads I had tucked under the front of my long shirt. He gently tugged them out and
examined them, and repeated a handful of words.
"He says the necklace you wear is proof of the portent," the Skartesh translated. "He believes it is made of fire and ice, trapped in stone. He says it
marks you as belonging to the great healer."
"We won't tell him that Hawk gave it to me as a gift of friendship." The chieftain's story intrigued me, however. "Who is this great healer?"
"It is only a figure from an old myth." Jylyj didn't seem very interested in it, either. "You should express your gratitude to the chieftain. He pays you a great

compliment."
I nodded and said, "Your words honor me. I thank you."
Once Jylyj had translated that into oKiaf for the chieftain, Dnoc grunted and gave my face a fond pat before standing. He called out, and a moment later
three tribesmen appeared.
As Dnoc spoke to his men, Jylyj said, "They are taking us to the kiafta reserved for special guests. We are to eat and rest until the night fires."
When we emerged from the chieftain's personal kiafta, the crowd of oKiaf waiting outside surprised me. I had thought the tribe would continue to keep
their distance until word that we had been made welcome by their leader had been passed around the encampment.
Then there was their unnerving interest. Hawk and Qonja should have received the most attention, as they were the most exotic-looking members of the
team, but everyone seemed to be staring at me.
I held on to Reever's hand. "Why are they looking at me like that?" I murmured to him.
"I don't know," he admitted. "But whatever happens, stay close to me."
One young male stepped boldly in front of us, stopping us in our tracks. He moved past Jylyj, Qonja, and Hawk and approached me. I studied his pale
gray pelt and the many scarification marks he had on his arms before I realized I was staring. I quickly ducked my head and bit my lip, hoping he hadn't
noticed.
The male went down on his hands and knees as he sniffed at my footgear and leggings. He did the same to the front of my long shirt, rising slowly until
he loomed over me. He bent to sniff my hair, his breath blowing some of it over my eyes.
Reever pushed me behind him and uttered a few words in oKiaf. At the same time, Jylyj moved in and bumped his shoulder into the young male's as he
said something in a challenging tone.
The young male stepped back, looked me over one more time, and then rejoined a group of males. They cuffed him on the arms and chest and talked
very fast.
"It's all right," Jylyj said. "Some of the younger men of the tribe like to test certain boundaries. It's usually tolerated unless it gets out of hand." He turned
to my husband. "How did you know what to say?"
"I absorbed some of their language during my contact with Dnoc." Reever scanned the faces watching us before giving the Skartesh a flat, unfriendly
look. "I hope I made my meaning clear."
"You have," Jylyj said.
I had the feeling they weren't talking about the young tribesman anymore.
"I'm getting a little hungry," I said to my husband. "Jylyj, will they bring our packs to the guest shelter? We need our rations."
The Skartesh nodded and turned to speak to one of our escorts.
Reever gripped my hand a little more firmly. "Nicely done," he murmured.
"I think enough challenges and meanings have been dealt with for one day," I said. "And, as it happens, I am hungry."
I slowed my steps as we walked past the large central cooking pit to look in some of the pots and see what the tribeswomen were preparing. Thick,
rich-looking stews filled about half of the pots, but others were covered with leaves. I saw one female uncovering a pot, and watched as she used two
short-handled, hand-sized versions of the pronged weapon the men carried to lift a browned haunch of meat from the pot.
Jylyj told us to wait there, and he went with Reever and one of our escorts to retrieve our packs.
An older female tending the pots noticed my interest and gestured for me to come closer. When I crouched down beside her, I saw she was preparing a
piece of meat, as well. She used a chipped piece of stone to fish one of the embers out of the pit, and skillfully wrapped it with a white substance in a
piece of tough-looking hide before wedging it in the last space between the meat and the inside of the pot. The scent of salty smoke grew stronger and
teased my nose before the woman covered the meat and the bundles with layer after layer of the leaves.
I had smoke-cured enough meat on Akkabarr to grasp the process if not the ingredients used, and when she gave me a questioning look, I nodded.
She turned her head and spoke to the woman who had finished cooking her meat, and the other female used her claws to carve a piece from it and came
to offer it to me.
I knew I shouldn't have accepted it, not without properly scanning the meat first to make sure it wouldn't disagree with my stomach. But it had been so
long since I had tasted real meat. The Jorenians ate only flowers and plants, and Reever told me that he and most of the other ensleg no longer used
game for food. Since hunting was not possible on a ship, and not permitted on Joren, all I had eaten since leaving the homeworld had been synthetic
protein.
In the end, I couldn't help myself. I tested it with a small nibble, and then groaned with pleasure as the dark, aromatic flavor of it spread over my tongue.
Before I could think twice about it, I had eaten the rest and licked my fingers like a youngling.
The women dropped their gazes abruptly as a shadow stretched over me.
I looked up at the Skartesh. "Where is Duncan?"
"He is trying to signal that trader friend of his." He seemed amused. "Did you like the taste of the namas?"
"It was delicious," I told him. "How do I tell them that, and thank them?"
He told me the words in oKiaf, and I repeated them carefully to the women. They seemed pleased, although the older woman gave Jylyj an odd look.
The three kiafta reserved for guests of the tribe had not been marked with any symbols, and seemed plain-looking compared to the others in the
encampment.
Jylyj gestured to the largest of the three. "That is for you and Reever. I will take the small one on the left, and Qonja and Hawk can sleep in the right."
I appreciated the chance for privacy, but Qonja seemed concerned.
"Should we sleep apart?" he asked the Skartesh. "Would it not be safer for us to occupy one together?"
"If we do, the tribe will think we are mataerel," Jylyj said. "It is what they call a mated group." He noticed Hawk's discomfort. "Be at ease, crossbreed.
As long as those who are involved are agreeable to it, the oKiaf do not forbid mating with more than one partner, or with someone of the same gender,
which is known as litaerel. Children who are orphaned at a young age are usually adopted by litaerel, as they cannot have children of their own."
"Would that I could bring my former ClanFather here," Qonja muttered as he ducked inside the kiafta Jylyj had suggested he and Hawk use.
The crossbreed didn't follow him, but remained with us. "I am surprised that the oKiaf have such progressive views about mating, and yet subjugate
their females as they do."
"What you call subjugation is in truth a biological imperative," Jylyj said. "oKiaf females produce a large amount of hormones that cause them to be
naturally timid. It often suppresses their survival instincts, and they will not defend themselves, no matter what opposition or danger they face. The males of
the species also make a generous supply of a similar hormone, only the effect it has on them drives them to be very aggressive and dominating,
particularly toward females. The oKiaf culture evolved as a result."
"Is the same true of the Skartesh?" I asked. When the resident gave me a surprised look, I added, "You have to admit, you have displayed some of the
same male characteristics."
"Our glandular systems are slightly different, but it's believed that the oKiaf and the Skartesh are the dece dents of one species. I will try not to be too

aggressive or dominating." He sounded stiff now, as if I had offended him. "The fire gathering will begin as soon as the sky is dark. You should rest while
you have the chance." He disappeared into the smallest kiafta.
"May I accompany you inside your shelter?" Hawk asked.
Still bewildered by Jylyj's reaction to my observation, I nodded, and led him into the kiafta.
Some of the same stone furnishings we had seen in the chieftain's shelter occupied the interior, but these did not appear as old or worn. A long hide
mat stuffed with what sounded like dried plant material lined the stone sleeping platform, as well as a coverlet of very soft golden fur. I ran my fingers over
the beautifully worked pelt and felt some small bumps, and parted the hairs to find more of the carved wood slivers. Each one had been carefully sewn to
the underlying hide and then concealed under the fur.
"Those are likely talismans," Hawk said, examining my find. "All people are vulnerable when they sleep, so they're probably protective charms."
"Or fertility symbols, to help a female conceive." I drew back the coverlet and sat down on the mat, which was comfortable without being too soft. "The
longer I am here, the more I like this world."
"So do I, but there is something that troubles me." Hawk went to close the hide over the entry before he came to sit beside me. "Jarn, Jylyj knows a
great deal about the oKiaf."
I nodded. "He has been very helpful. We probably wouldn't have done as well with Dnoc without his advice."
"That is what I thought, until he spoke of their mating practices, and how accepting they are of those like me and Qonja." Hawk stroked his hand over
the pelt coverlet in an absent fashion. "Such matters are part of the private lives of the tribe. On Joren, you never hear the people speak of how Choosing
is forbidden to those of the same gender--especially with offworlders."
I had to agree with him; if Reever had not told me I would have never known about the taboo. "Do you think what he told us is wrong?"
"It is not what he said, exactly. We have heard him speak to the oKiaf, and they understand him completely. He gave us their words for the different
relationships within the tribe--very personal, private words. He also knew that litaerel couples adopt orphaned children because they cannot reproduce
naturally. For an offworlder who has only visited this world a few times, he knows so very much." Hawk made an uneasy gesture. "Too much, I think."
I considered what he had said. "We don't know how long he stayed here during his visits. Obviously, he learned their language, so his visits had to be of
some duration. When you consider how much importance the oKiaf give to ritual matters, it may be that he studied their culture extensively before he even
came here."
"It worries me, Jarn," Hawk persisted. "Jylyj is not merely knowledgeable about the oKiaf. He is practically an expert. You know how carefully the
League prepares their intelligence operatives."
"I had my own suspicions, and went so far as to perform a DNA test on him," I admitted. "Jylyj's genes are pure Skartesh."
"Then he cannot be a League spy sent to sabotage the mission." The crossbreed Terran gave me a rueful look. "Qonja says my imagination does run
away with itself sometimes."
"We should ask him about how he learned so much," I said. "I'm sure he can explain everything."
"Yes." Jylyj stepped through a slit in the hide opposite the entry. "I think I will start with how easy it is to hear what is being said in a nearby kiafta."
Hawk moved quickly to his feet and his wings spread out, one curling over my head. "I apologize for any offense my words have caused," he said, "but
they were not meant for your ears."
"Such words are generally the most offensive." Jylyj gazed down at me. "You might have asked me to take the DNA test voluntarily, Healer Jarn. I would
not have refused you."
I felt miserable. "Hawk, would you allow me to speak with Jylyj alone?"
The crossbreed didn't seem happy, but he nodded and left the shelter.
"Is this wise?" Jylyj asked. "If I am a League spy, I might take this opportunity to sabotage the mission."
I didn't like the way he was snarling at me. "You must not have been listening too closely, or you would have heard me defending you to Hawk."
"You trust me only because I have the proper genes. Forgive me if I am not overwhelmed by your confidence." He moved as if to leave, and then turned
back to me. "I do know much about oKia. For many years I have done nothing but dream about someday returning again to live among the tribes. But I am
not one of the people, and my calling has assured that I never will be. Is there anything more you want to know? Ask me."
"There is one thing." I stood. "Can you stop shouting at me before Qonja comes in here and declares you his ClanKill?"
"In truth, I have no HouseClan," Qonja said as he stepped in through the other side entrance. His dark blue claws gleamed. "That simply means I can
gut anyone I wish, whenever I like."
"So it would seem." Jylyj gave the Jorenian a measuring look. "Your pardon, Healer Jarn. I should not have spoken in anger to you."
"I think you had some cause, but I accept." I glanced at Qonja. "I shield Jylyj."
"Yes, of course you do." The Jorenian sighed his disappointment and retracted his claws. "Three females are waiting outside with food. They are
becoming terrified. I suggest we invite them in before we frighten them off for good."

Eleven
By the time I had neatly arranged on the table the baskets of food the tribeswomen had brought, Reever returned with our packs. I scanned the food and
found most of it to be edible, although two types of fruit contained an alkaloid that would have made me, Reever, and possibly Hawk very ill. I set those
aside and asked Jylyj if he would mention to the tribeswomen that we could not eat them.
The Skartesh remained in a silent, sullen mood, but nodded and gathered a portion of the food before retreating to his kiafta. Qonja and Hawk did the
same, leaving me alone with Reever.
He gave me a wary look. "Something happened while I was gone."
"These hide shelters make it easy to eavesdrop on one's neighbors," I said. "Jylyj heard me speaking with Hawk about him. He became angry. Qonja
threatened to gut him. I protected him. It's over and done with."
Reever's mouth twisted and he put his arms around me. "I can't leave you alone for five minutes."
"Of course you can. I have my case now, and the next time something like this happens, I'll sedate everyone." I went to the table. "Come, sit down and
eat. Were you able to contact your friend?"
"It took some time, but I finally established a secure relay with Uorwlan's ship," he told me, walking over to inspect the native foods. "She passed along
some new information about the mercenary offering the bounty on us."
I retrieved some pouches of water from our packs. "How would she know that?"
"All of the traders in this region have been receiving regular signals from mercenaries and bounty hunters requesting information about us," my husband
said as he sat down and sorted through a basket of nuts. "Uorwlan convinced one she has crewed with to tell her what he knows. It seems the bounty is
being offered by a wealthy Terran with friends among the League. The Terran has been using some of their transports as lookouts."
As we ate, I thought of the League general responsible for the Jado Massacre and Cherijo's abduction from Oenrall. "You don't think Colonel Shropana
is the one hunting us?"
Reever shook his head. "Shropana isn't Terran, and he's too afraid of what Teulon Jado might do if he crosses us again." He gazed down at the pieces
of meat I offered him. "We have synpro rations in the packs."
"We did not kill these animals," I informed him. "The tribe did. It's very good. At least try it."
His expression turned cold. "You've already eaten some of it."
"One of the women offered me a taste. I saw no harm in it." I felt exasperated with him. "Duncan, using animals for food is no different than eating
plants. Both are alive. Both must die to sustain the life of another."
"Plants do not have minds," he pointed out. "Animals do."
"I wouldn't say that to a Psyoran." I saw that he wasn't going to change his mind. "I suppose you don't want me to eat it, either." He gave me a pointed
look, and I set aside the meat. "Oh, very well. I will eat only mindless plants and the synpro from the rations--and I will be very cranky about it, too."
He covered my hand with his. "Thank you."
We finished our meal while discussing the information Uorwlan had offered. We once more considered and discarded the idea that the bounty was
being offered by Alek Davidov. Even if he had returned to the quadrant, he had known we were on Joren; he wouldn't have wasted credits sending
mercenaries out to hunt for us.
"You are certain that the information your friend received is accurate?" I asked.
"No," Reever conceded. "But Cherijo was created on Terra, and her father must have kept some records about his experiments on her. If they were
discovered after his death, they might have motivated another researcher to offer the bounty."
"You said what was done to make Cherijo was illegal," I pointed out. "That her creator even had laws written so that no one else would be permitted to
experiment on humans, while he did so in secret."
"Times and laws change," Reever said. "Especially when the secrets of immortality are involved."
Something occurred to me. "What if they are not looking for Cherijo? What if they are looking for you?"
His eyebrows rose. "I am useful to them only as a tool to manipulate you."
"Joseph Grey Veil had time only to experiment on you before he died," I said. "If what he injected in you was all he had, then the chameleon cells in your
body are the only ones in existence. They might have discovered that fact among his records."
"Squilyp said the cells remain dormant until some damage or illness occurs." Reever rubbed the spot on his chest where a drone on Vtaga had
stabbed him. "In that state, they can't be distinguished from my body's natural cells. They wouldn't be able to find them to extract them."
My arm twinged, reminding me of what had happened to Cherijo when the Hsktskt had tried to brand her with a slave identification. "They could if they
first tortured you."
Both of us had little appetite after that, so I packed away the food and performed a quick survey of our packs to ensure that none of our equipment or
supplies had been removed. As I was separating what I would need for the next day's trek, Reever inspected the inside of the kiafta, and retrieved a piece
of hide that had been left under the sleeping platform. He brought it to the table and began studying the many symbols embedded in the fur.
"The oKiaf use a modified form of pictographs as their written language," he told me. "Each symbol is representative of a concept rather than literal
translation of a spoken word."
I noticed the three-sided symbol repeated over and over on the hide. "Qonja said the triangle symbol must be important to them. He called it a triad,
and noticed that they also group many things in the encampment in threes."
"Trinities or triads are common in many primitive belief systems," my husband said. "They are usually represented by a central deity, a representative of
the common people, and an intermediary figure. On Terra, the cult of Christianity worshipped a paternal God, his half-human son, and a Holy Spirit. The
Jorenians hold sacred the Mother of All Houses, Tarek Varena, and the path they forged together." He glanced at me. "You rarely speak of Iisleg beliefs."
"Daevena is the goddess of women, and Kette is the god of men," I told him. "The people do not worship them together, and there are other, minor
gods, but Daevena and Kette are the two central deities. I suppose the vral represent an intermediary. They were believed to be sent by both gods to
reward courage by restoring the brave to life."
Reever eyed me. "I have no faith, Jarn, but I would not deny you your beliefs."
"The skela, miserable as they were, insisted that Daevena watched over them. I saw no evidence of that, but it was simpler to go along with what they
believed." I shrugged. "Faith demands a great deal of the believer. I have paid my respects to the goddess through prayer, but I could not bring myself to
sacrifice an animal to her. I could not see how giving her my food would make my life better, especially when I was hungry."
My husband took one of the recording units we had brought to take images and measurements, and took several images of the symbols on the hide.
He then isolated the images of the symbols themselves and wired a wristcom to the device.
"Do you think the translator will read them for you?" I asked, amused.

"No, but it will download into the unit's memory every corresponding pictograph in the translator's database. Not all languages are spoken, and some
symbols are almost universal." He adjusted some of the settings, put the results on the image display, and began to read. "It has matched seven symbols:
tribe, promise, stranger, three, one, death, eternity."
A chill inched over my skin. "Is it some sort of death threat to strangers?"
Reever consulted the hide. "The symbol for death is not connected to the one for the strangers. It's imprinted beside the eternity symbol. They are the
only two that appear together."
"Death equals eternity?" I guessed.
He rubbed his chin. "That, or eternity dies."
Reever continued to work on decoding and translating the hide symbols while I prepared a medical report of what little I had observed regarding the
health of the tribe. By the time I finished, I was surprised to discover that Reever had made little progress.
"It could be a prayer," he said. "The tribe promises to find or nurture or safeguard strangers, and in return the triad will ensure that time or the world or
the universe does not end."
"Jylyj can't read their language, but he can ask what it means," I suggested. "Why don't we bring it to the gathering?"
"The hide was deliberately concealed," Reever said. "If the tribe sees that we have removed it without asking permission, it may be considered a
serious discourtesy." He placed the hide back under the stone platform. "Many of the same symbols are etched into the kiafta hides. I can ask Jylyj to
obtain a translation of some of them."
We took a few minutes to change into the thicker, warmer garments the Elphian had given us to wear at night. Reever also brushed out and rebraided
my hair, and knotted his own at the back in Jorenian warrior fashion. When we stepped outside into the cold twilight, Qonja and Hawk also emerged.
The Jorenian, accustomed to a much warmer climate, visibly shivered. "I can see why the tribe gathers around a fire at night."
Hawk went to Jylyj's kiafta and called out to him, then looked inside before returning. "He's not there."
I felt a twinge of guilt. Had my conversation with Hawk offended the Skartesh to the point that he would avoid us? "Perhaps he went ahead."
"Why would I do that?" Jylyj appeared out of nowhere, his dark eyes glittering. "Come. They are waiting."
We followed him to the center cooking pit, which had been cleared of pots and piled high with seasoned heartwood. The flames were already climbing
up the sides of the stacks and blazing brightly; I felt the heat on my face from twenty paces away.
The tribe had assembled around the point of each spiral in the fire stones, most of the females sitting with their children on hides stretched over the
ground while the men stood or moved freely around the fire. I heard only male voices at first, but then caught the quieter murmur of the women as they
spoke to the children.
All of the tribespeople fell silent as soon as they spotted us approaching, until the only sound I heard was the crackling of the fire.
Jylyj led us to a place between two spirals where an unadorned hide had been placed, and indicated that I should sit. Reever stood behind me as I sat
down, tucking my legs to the side as the tribeswomen did.
A rather noisy procession from the chieftain's kiafta distracted everyone, and I watched as several men in elaborately arranged furs led the chieftain to
three large stones used to shape a low platform. Rather than sit on them, Dnoc gestured for the older female following him to sit down, and then strode up
to the fire, casting what appeared to be a handful of soil into the flames. It must have been something else, for it caused a wide plume of fragrant purple
smoke to billow up toward the sky.
Dnoc began to gesture and speak, and Jylyj again translated his words for us.
"We offer our thanks for another bountiful day, and our hopes for a peaceful night. The people are one with the land, and the land nourishes and protects
the people. We ask for blessings on our women and our children, and good weather and luck for our hunters. For the respectful strangers who have come
to us, we ask your care and guidance."
Dnoc ended his short speech by tossing another substance onto the flames that this time produced a sizzling burst of golden sparks. This seemed to
signal the end of the formalities, for the tribesmen began moving around and speaking among themselves, while the women retreated briefly into the
shadows before they returned bearing baskets and platters of food, which they spread out on the hides.
Several of the women brought food over to us, and shyly handed each offering to me. I thanked each female using the words in oKiaf that Jylyj had
taught me, which seemed to please them.
After helping themselves to the food their mothers had set out, the tribe's children all left their family groups and gathered around an elderly male, who
shook out a hide and attached the carved wooden rings sewn to its upper corners to two of the prong weapons that had been driven into the ground. I
watched, fascinated by the firelight that played over the fur, which seemed to shimmer with its own light.
"May we go closer to the old one?" Reever asked Jylyj, who nodded. My husband held out his hand to me, and helped me up from the hide before we
followed Jylyj.
We stayed at the edge of the group of children, some of whom gave us curious glances before turning their attention to the elderly male. From here I
could see that the symbols rubbed into the hide had been also painted with different colored pigments that contained tiny particles of a reflective material.
"The old male is one of the tribe's storytellers," Jylyj said. "Everything he says is also recorded on the hide. This is how they teach the young ones to
understand it."
"What story is he telling tonight?" Reever asked.
"Chetere's loneliness."
The name seemed familiar to me, although I didn't know why. "What does Chetere mean?"
Jylyj thought for a moment. "The name is difficult to translate, as it is a person and a thing and a state of being. Outsiders who have heard the story often
call him the Star Wolf."
The elderly storyteller waited until all of the children grew still and silent, and then in a deep, dramatic tone began to speak. Jylyj whispered his
translation:
"Before the time of living things, there were only stars and emptiness. Nothing moved or grew or breathed. What was then became sad, because the
hollow was made to be filled. The lonely stars came together and brought forth the first one, the golden-touched, he who would be the tribe. They called
him Star Wolf, and set him upon the world that would be his, and everything he touched moved and grew and breathed. The stars looked down upon the
abundance and were glad. They told their son that he would live forever in the abundance, and they would watch over him.
"But Star Wolf alone could not be the tribe, and so he prayed for another to be made and sent down from the skies. The stars did not listen. They only
watched from their lonely places, for they did not know what it was to be more than one. When Star Wolf's prayers became too loud, they tired of him and
brought down the darkness so they would not have to see his sadness.
"Star Wolf wandered, alone and blind, and still the abundance flowed from him. The small creatures grew larger, and the world richer, but still he longed
for the tribe. When he could no longer bear the solitude, he took up his dagger and cut himself in two.
"His blood soaked into the ground, turning it red, and the world that he had made abundant began to wither. The skies wept, and the land shook, until
the stars lifted the darkness and saw what had become of their only child. They sent down their healing light, and from one part of Star Wolf fashioned a

man, and from the other a woman. To honor Star Wolf, and so that man and woman might never be alone, they gave them the gift of creation. Whenever
the two become one, another is made. So the first tribe came to be."
The storyteller made a broad gesture, sweeping his arm to encompass all of the intent young faces.
"Star Wolf's blood still makes the ground under you red. Whenever you see it, remember his sacrifice. He made it so that you could be his sons and
daughters, the tribe he never knew."
The children reached out to the elderly male, touching him affectionately on the arms and belly with their small paws. He returned the gestures by
placing his paws on their heads and murmuring words too soft for us to hear.
The story probably should have seemed gruesome, but I found it strangely beautiful.
"So this is how the oKiaf believe they were created?" I asked Jylyj.
"It is how they believe the universe was made," he corrected. "The oKiaf believe that Star Wolf was the first humanoid, the father of all people."
A minor commotion on the other side of the fire pit distracted me, and I looked over to see the chieftain and his men had moved away toward a group
just entering the encampment. The new arrivals wore heavy cloaks with fur-lined hoods, and along with packs carried two long branches from which the
limp body of a big, muscular animal hung.
"Who are they?" I asked Jylyj.
"I don't know. Travelers usually wait until morning to present themselves." He shifted, trying to get a better look. "They've brought a recent kill, which
means they have hunting rights in this territory. Only the chieftain can grant them that kind of status."
The game the strangers had brought was taken away by six tribesmen, while Dnoc conferred with the tallest member of the group. He gestured several
times in our direction.
"We should go and introduce ourselves," the Skartesh said. "The first to meet travelers are always any other travelers in the encampment."
We walked around the fire, and as soon as Dnoc saw us, he gestured for us to join them. Five of the travelers pulled back their hoods, revealing oKiaf
faces, but the sixth and tallest of the group remained cloaked.
"Does the chieftain know what a troublemaker you are, Duncan?" the tall one called out in flawless Terran. "I can tell him, if you like."
My husband's expression softened, and he released my hand to go to the stranger. They curled one arm around each other's neck in a curious embrace
before the tall one shrugged out of the cloak.
The traveler was not oKiaf, but a member of some feline species, and had a long, narrow head covered in short black-and-white fur. I guessed her to be
Uorwlan, Reever's trader friend, although she wore the native dress of a male, adapted to accommodate an intricate weapons harness that crisscrossed
her torso and hips. An astonishing amount of silver ornaments with glittering clear blue gems hung from her neck. Her eyes, much larger and more slanted
than the oKiaf's, matched the gems in color and brilliance.
To my eyes she looked rather a starving, dirty jlorra, but Jylyj and every other male around me seemed to be staring at her with great admiration.
"Where is this Jarn you've told me of?" the feline woman asked. "I want to meet the female who convinced you to take her to wife."
I considered that an invitation, and walked over to stand at my husband's side.
"My wife, Jarn," Reever told the female. He looked down at me. "This is my friend, Uorwlan."
"I am happy to know you," I said, and made the Jorenians' polite gesture of welcome. "Do you know you're wearing the garments of a male?"
"She has good eyes." The Takgiba's piercing blue gaze shifted down and then up as Uorwlan inspected me. "But Terrans are usually larger, are they
not? Is she a child, or a runt?"
"I am an adult, but I was made in a machine," I told her before Duncan could answer. "Evidently, there wasn't much room in it."
"So it would seem." Uorwlan's thin white lips peeled back from sharp-looking teeth in a faint snarl. "I've tried to learn that Jorenian hand-speak, but it
made my wrists sore." Without warning, she bent and slung her arm around my neck. "Good to meet you, little sister."
I returned the embrace, feeling awkward but determined to make Duncan's friend feel welcome.
Uorwlan straightened, cuffed me under my chin, and eyed Jylyj, Qonja, and Hawk. "Are these your other husbands?"
I smothered a laugh and shook my head as I performed the introductions. The Takgiba gave each man the same rough embrace before addressing
Reever.
"I thought I'd come down to the planet and see how you were fairing," she said. "I trade with all the tribes in this region; Dnoc and I are old friends. He
thinks I'm a male, by the way, so don't wreck my hunting privileges by telling him otherwise. I've no taste for cooking and scraping the ground with my
nose."
That explained her choice of garments. "I wish I'd thought of that."
"It helps not to have discernable teats," she told me, rubbing the flat surface of her chest. "Mine pop out only after I breed. Not that I plan to. I've yet to
meet a male worthy of siring my offspring." She gave my husband a sly glance. "Well, one, but my kind and Terrans can't crossbreed. Probably for the
best. Back when we were slave running, Duncan and I would have whelped an entire colony of kids between us."
My chest felt tight as I realized what she meant. This female and my husband had been lovers.
Dnoc spoke to Jylyj, who said, "The chieftain asks if you want your usual kiafta, Uorwlan."
"Why bunk alone when there are two Terrans to warm me?" the Takgiba said. "I'll sleep with Reever and Jarn."
We took Uorwlan with us back to our kiafta, although I felt a little disgruntled with how quickly Reever had agreed to let her stay with us. I didn't know why
it bothered me, either--Iisleg customs gave men the right to have two women, and it wouldn't be the first time I had shared a bed with two other people.
Uorwlan talked a great deal, all the way from the fire to our shelters, and hardly paused for breath. She spoke of her overland trek to reach the camp,
killing the game with her escorts, and how paranoid the Elphian had become lately. By the time we bid the others good night, I was almost tempted to ask
Qonja and Hawk if I could join them.
As soon as we were alone, the Takgiba began stripping out of her clothing, revealing more black-and-white fur and a long, thin tail that moved as
languidly as Uorwlan did.
"Secure the inside of the entry hide, will you, Jarn?" the Takgiba asked. "The natives won't intrude on us, but they've been known to peek."
I saw she intended to remove all of her garments, and turned to Reever. "You never let me sleep naked."
He shook his head at me slightly before addressing the Takgiba. "Uorwlan, my wife and I are exclusive to each other. We will not have sex with you."
"What?" The feline gave him a look almost as astonished as my own.
"She thinks she can couple with us?" I said, almost at the same time.
"How else am I to get warm?" Uorwlan gave me a hateful look. "So this is what you've done to him? Turned him into a Jorenian?"
I didn't like that, especially as being exclusive had been Reever's idea from the beginning. "Terrans are usually monogamous," I informed her. "When I
agreed to become his wife, I also accepted his ways."
"That Terran"--Uorwlan pointed to Reever--"was never monogamous. Even when he shared my bed. In fact, he went through females almost as quickly
as he did blades."
I had forced myself to accept that Reever had given his love to Cherijo before me. Now it would seem a small army of females had had him even before

her.
She studied my expression. "He didn't mention that, did he? Ah, well, they never do. All males are seeders, you know, and they're never truly happy
unless they can spread it around. Did he ever tell you about the slave harem we liberated from the pleasure colony on Anig fel? I ended up putting guards
on our cabin so he could get a few hours' sleep. You wouldn't believe what I had to do to have him to myself once a week."
"What my husband did with you or anyone else in his past is irrelevant to me." Anger made my voice cold. "All you need to know is that you can't have
him now."
"Is that what you think, little sister?" She bared her teeth and tugged a blade out of her belt. "Duncan saved my life, and I'm in his debt. He can ask
anything of me, and I will give it to him." She tossed the dagger from one set of claws to the other. "So if he wants a place in my bed, on my ship, or
anywhere else, it's his."
I pulled one of my own blades and held it ready. "Not anymore."
"Perhaps I should go and sleep with Qonja and Hawk," Reever said as he stepped between us and with two blurred motions took the blades from our
hands. He looked at Uorwlan. "You are my friend, but Jarn is my wife, and I love her. You will respect that and our bond." He turned to me. "And you, Wife.
You will calm down and not provoke Uorwlan any further."
"Provoke her?" I echoed, outraged. "She drew the first blade. You wish me to stand by the next time she loses her temper and let her stab me?"
Reever's eyes darkened. "I wish you to leave her alone, Jarn."
"If you are finished arguing," Jylyj said from outside the side entry to the shelter, "we have been summoned to meet with the master hunter."

Twelve
The frigid air nipped at my hot cheeks and curled around my clenched fists as I stepped outside. The encampment had obviously settled in for the night,
for I saw only a few males walking around the outside of the shelters farthest from the fire pit. Like the men on watch who had met us earlier that day, they
carried the pronged weapons, but each also held a small torch of flaming heartwood, which they used to illuminate their path.
I wanted one of those torches. I could see myself accidentally dropping it on Uorwlan's twitching tail. Or my husband's thick head.
Reever paced me. "You're angry with me."
"When did you notice?" I didn't look at him. "Before she pulled a blade on me, or after?"
"You don't understand Uorwlan or what she was trying to do. I had to stop you before you did something foolish." He tried to take my hand as if he meant
to establish a link.
"So I am ignorant and foolish." I avoided his touch and put another foot of space between us. "That is good to know. I might never have come to that
conclusion by myself. Thank you for educating me."
He moved closer. "If you will allow me to explain--"
"I need no explanations from you, Duncan," I said flatly. "If you prefer to be with her, all you need do is say so, and I will step aside. But we have a child,
and Marel is more important than your desire to . . . how did she put it? Run through females as fast as you do blades?"
He made a frustrated sound. "Uorwlan has a love of the dramatic, and she always exaggerates things. She believes that the relationship she had with
me in the past gives her first rights. There is also a more immediate problem with her. She is--"
"Daevena take Uorwlan," I snapped, sick of hearing his concern for her. "You can have her if you like. You can have as many females as you wish-create a new harem for yourself, if you desire--but know this: Whatever you do with her, whatever she means to you, when we leave here, you are coming
with me."
"I was afraid you would mistake my meaning," he said. "I don't want Uorwlan, Jarn."
Now I looked at him. "I don't care, Duncan."
"The oKiaf consider public quarreling between a male and female extremely distasteful," Jylyj said. "They regard it on the same level as relieving
yourself in the open."
I glared at him. "Yes, of course. We wouldn't wish to piss on the ground in front of anyone."
There was no more time for him to say anything, for we had arrived at the master hunter's kiafta. Jylyj called out a soft-voiced greeting, and the entry
hide was opened to admit us.
The master hunter's family already occupied their sleeping platforms, and the older male paused to tuck a fur around the smallest child before turning to
greet us. He wore few ornaments in his mane, and had heavily scarred arms and paws that bore mute testimony to his experience.
"This is Seno," Jylyj said. "He has hunted this land for many years, and knows of a place that may be of interest to us."
Seno retrieved a piece of hide from a bundle stowed to one side of the table. He spread it out flat and, using a blackened twig, began to sketch what
appeared to be a crude map. He pointed to each area as he drew it and spoke to Jylyj, who translated.
"From the encampment, we must walk north approximately five kim, and take the pass between two cliffs for another two." He listened for a moment to
the master hunter. "The place beyond the cliffs is the tribe's burial grounds, so we can't go any farther than that. He says there are shining stones lining the
gaps in the ground at the base of the east cliff. From his description, the stones are some sort of crystalline mineral."
Reever studied the map and then said something in oKiaf to Seno. The master hunter gave him a confused look in return.
"He doesn't understand what you mean," Jylyj told him. "The oKiaf don't acknowledge things like illness, old age, or dying."
"I used the same words the storyteller did tonight at the fire," my husband said. "You should know; you interpreted them for us."
"The myth of the Star Wolf is just a children's tale," the Skartesh said. "What happened to the first one is not what the people believe happen to them."
Now I felt bewildered. "You're saying that the tribe doesn't believe they get sick or die?"
"It's not the words they use," Jylyj insisted. "The cycle of life for the oKiaf is very specific: whelping, weaning, learning, mating, teaching, passing, and
flowing. Those are the only states of being that they recognize for themselves."
"What is flowing?" Reever asked.
"I suppose it's the afterlife," Jylyj said. "After life leaves the body, it flows into the bellies of the stars, to nourish them."
"Hunting cultures often have such pragmatic beliefs about an afterlife," Reever said. "I find it interesting, and somewhat bizarre, that the oKiaf mythos is
so similar to that of the Jorenians, who believe they are embraced by the stars."
"It is not that unusual to find cultures who share almost identical beliefs," the Skartesh said. "Before the HouseClans were formed, the indigenous
beings on Joren were, like the oKiaf, tribal hunter-gatherers."
Seno folded the hide and offered it to Reever, who thanked him in oKiaf for it before we left the kiafta.
As we walked back to our shelter, I noticed that the storyteller's hide had not yet been removed from the frame.
"Could we go and take a closer look?" I asked Jylyj after I pointed it out. "I couldn't get near enough to make out all of the symbols while he was telling
the story."
"I can't read it for you," Jylyj said, "and it is very old. But as long as we don't touch or disturb it, no one should mind."
Up close I saw the hide had been worked even more elaborately than I had imagined, with tiny beads and carvings embedded in the fur around the
symbols. It also looked very old, as Jylyj had said; the edges and the underside of the fur had been covered in many places with precisely sewn patches.
I could recall every word of the Star Wolf story, so I tried to follow the columns of symbols and make out which corresponded with the elements of the
tale. I could make out almost everything but three symbols rubbed inside a circle of dark stones in the very center of the hide.
Compared to the other symbols, these three seemed much more refined and specific. In the center, glittering silver had been applied to a distinctly
humanoid-looking figure. To the right and left of the figure were seven-pointed star shapes, one painted white, and the other black.
"I don't think these three were part of the story," I said to Reever. "The symbols for the Star Wolf and the people of the tribe are painted in brown, gold,
and black. The figure can't be one of them."
"They could be symbols representing the name of the tribe, to indicate ownership of the hide," my husband suggested.
"The tribe's name, Parrak, is a word in the old tongue; it means 'a fire that burns from within,' " Jylyj said. "It's getting late. We should go back to our
shelters."
The old storyteller came to the frame, nodding to Reever as he took down the hide. The black and white symbols were what interested me. "Jylyj, can
you ask him what it means?"
Before the Skartesh could reply, Reever spoke to the storyteller, who regarded him with some surprise before he moved his hand over the center circle
and spoke three words.

Reever frowned. "I don't understand what he's saying."
"He says that the symbols represent crystal eternity," Jylyj said at last. "It's probably one of the old terms for the afterlife."
I felt a surge of excitement. "We've never heard them use the word crystal, only rock or shining stone. Could the black star represent the black crystal?"
"No, Healer," the Skartesh said. "The word I translated as crystal only means 'clear' or 'unclouded' to the oKiaf. Another interpretation of what the elder
said would be 'to see clearly forever.' "
I recalled the words Dnoc had used when he had spoken to me. "The chieftain used the same word when he called me on who belonged to the great
healer."
Jylyj averted his gaze. "Translations are not always exact."
"So what did it mean when Dnoc said it?" I persisted.
"The exact words he used could be interpreted to mean 'crystal healer,' " the Skartesh said reluctantly.
"Such subtle differences in word meanings are often difficult for non-native speakers to learn," Reever said. "You display an admirable grasp of this
language."
"I have a small natural talent for interpreting, and even once considered becoming a linguist, like you," Jylyj told him. "But the call to healing was too
much for me." He moved to help the old storyteller take down the hide. "I will stay and help him carry this back to his kiafta. You should go and sleep now.
The guide will be ready to leave the encampment at dawn."
Reever remained very quiet as we walked back to the shelters, so much so that I stopped him just before we entered. The cold air enclosed us in its
frigid stillness, and our breaths formed thick white puffs as we looked at each other.
"I am sorry that I lost my temper earlier," I said. "I'll try to get along with your friend."
"It is not that." He touched my arm. "We can't talk out here. Come inside."
We found Uorwlan sitting at the table and cleaning her weapons. She gave me a sideways glance. "Here, little sister." She offered me one of her finest
daggers. "I apologize for goading you. I am happy that Reever has taken a wife, even if he had the very bad taste to choose someone other than me."
I accepted her apology and offered my own, along with my finest blade, which seemed to settle matters between us, at least for now. Reever sat down
across from the Takgiba and took out the hide map for her to see.
Uorwlan wasn't interested in the map, however. "You have that look in your eyes, the one you used to get whenever a slaver tried to bribe us. What is it?
"
"The Skartesh with us is acting as our interpreter," Reever said. "I think he also is deceiving us. I have absorbed enough of the tribe's language to know
most of their common concepts. When I asked the Skartesh about a symbol that I believe represents death, he claimed the oKiaf use the word only in
their myths, and don't apply the concept in reference to what happens to them at the end of life. Yet tonight when I asked the old storyteller if a symbol on
the hide meant death, he wasn't offended. He genuinely didn't know what I meant--as if the end of life, or death itself, had no meaning for him."
"It could be what Jylyj was trying to say," I suggested. "Perhaps he worded his explanation badly. He didn't translate the words Dnoc used to me exactly
as he should have."
"I would agree, but there was something else. The storyteller used three specific words to describe the center symbols on his hide. Jylyj only translated
two of them to mean 'crystal eternity.' " I know the oKiaf word for eternity: detorne. The storyteller did not utter that word."
"What did he say?" Uorwlan asked.

"Naif valen fian."
She shook her head. "I have never heard those words spoken, so I can't translate them for you. But if this Skartesh has lied about the meaning of one
word, it's likely that he's lied about others. Tell me more about him."
"He will return soon," I warned. "I will keep watch for him while you talk."
While I stood at the entry hide and acted as lookout, Reever related to Uorwlan everything we knew about Jylyj, including how he had denied being the
one I had seen in the water on Joren.
"I know these people," I heard the Takgiba say after my husband had finished. "I've traded with them regularly for the last five years, and spend every
summer here hunting with them. I've an ear for languages, you know that, and still I've learned enough of their tongue only to communicate the basics. It
would take a lifetime of living with the tribe to understand the things this Skartesh claims he knows."
I saw a tall, lean figure approaching and turned my head. "He's coming."
"Is this the way into his shelter?" Uorwlan asked, pointing to the side entry. When I nodded, she unfastened it.
"What are you doing?" I whispered.
"I mean to see if this Skartesh knows how to properly warm a female," she said, "and if he talks in his sleep." Her tail shivered as she stepped through
and vanished.
"She will get herself beaten," I muttered, waiting to hear Jylyj shout at the Takgiba, but hearing nothing at all. Then a faint growling sound came from the
direction of the Skartesh's shelter, answered and soothed to a rumble by a higher, more feminine purr.
"It would seem Jylyj found better things to do than beat her," Reever said.
I turned my back toward the side entry, absently blocking out the sounds. On Akkabarr there had been little privacy, so I had learned early on to offer it by
ignoring the sights and sounds of things that were not meant to be shared with others. But even as I chose not to hear them, I still didn't like Uorwlan
coupling with Jylyj.
"She is reckless," I whispered to my husband.
"No, she is in season," Reever murmured. "That is why she drew a blade on you. The females of her kind fight for mating privileges."
That made her strange behavior seem more logical, and explained why she had wanted to couple with me and Reever the moment we were alone. Still,
after what my husband had said about Jylyj and the deceptive translations, I worried. "You are sure she will be all right with him?"
"Uorwlan can take care of herself," he assured me, and tugged on my hand. "Now, come to bed, Wife, and let me warm you."
Sometime later I lay curled up beside Duncan and listened to him breathe. No more sounds came from Jylyj's shelter, and I heard only the occasional
footsteps of the men on watch patrolling the encampment as they passed near our kiafta.
In my mind I saw the three symbols enclosed by the dark circle on the storyteller's hide, and thought of what Reever had told me about the triads of
different cultures. They didn't seem to fit with the universal God-man-intermediary belief, for the figure of the silver man had stood between the white and
black stars. There had also been something odd about the way the symbols had been rendered; they had been simply made, and not intricately adorned
like those around them depicting the Star Wolf story.
White like new snow, black like the endless void . . . and a being who stood between them.
It nagged at me, in the same way a half-forgotten word sat on the tongue, waiting to be fully remembered and spoken. Would my former self know what
to make of the symbols? Did she know something that I did not?
As I puzzled over the symbols, I finally began to drift off. I swayed between consciousness and sleep, though, neither here nor there, too aware of my
surroundings to be completely at ease, but too tired to force myself to keep watch.

A dream came to me, as swift and silent as a raider, and took me from the kiafta and through a labyrinth of shadows until I found myself back on Trellus.
I walked through the winding labyrinth of collected objects that Swap had cemented together into his highly unusual art.

Yes. Now show us where.
I retreated from the voice in my head, cringing as I tried to find the passage back to Mercy House. I passed through an airlock, but instead of entering a
passage to my friend's dome, I stepped outside.
The surface of Trellus had been transformed. No longer an airless landscape of crumbling, lifeless rock, the planet was now covered with plants and
trees. I didn't see the dome colony, but I sensed animals hiding in the brush and watching me. Then I caught a glitter of blue and began to walk toward it.
Where the ore crushers of the abandoned arutanium mine had once stood rusting were now towering columns of blue crystal. Beneath my feet the
ground glittered with smaller, paler growths pushing through a mat of fused slivers and shards. All of my senses seemed muted in this place; I could not
taste or smell anything, and my hands seemed to drag at my wrists when I tried to touch the crystal.

You were not meant for this.
I turned toward the sound I thought I heard, but saw only my face reflected in one of the columns. The sides of the crystal divided my features in half at
first, and then the reflections moved apart and became mirror twins.
"I am here." I turned around and saw myself duplicated, over and over, on the surface of each column. My faces stared back at me, wide-eyed and pale,
narrow-eyed and scowling.

What was meant to be can never be, unless the sacrifice is made.
I knew what a sacrifice was, but the rest seemed like gibberish. "What do you mean? What sacrifice do you demand?"

It cannot be asked, what must be asked. It cannot be taken, what was taken.
I watched my twin faces turn toward each other. Cracks began to run through the columns as the two Jarns drew closer. They did not melt back into one
reflection, however. They collided and shattered, screams distorting their mouths.
I ran through the columns, dodging them as I tried to find my way back to the encampment and Duncan. Only the sudden appearance of a frowning redhaired female made me skid to a halt.
"Well, well. If it isn't my favorite, heavily armed doormat." She made a triangular server appear in her hand and sipped it, sighing with pleasure. "How
are you, Jarn? Want a drink? No one distills a better mind-altering intoxicant than the Terrans."
I watched as a structure built itself around us. It enclosed us like a dark box, and furnished itself like a large galley, only not nearly as clean. Terrans of
various ages and genders began appearing, some drinking together and laughing, others silent and alone. In one corner, a life-sized, rusted drone tried to
blow through a complicated-looking alloy instrument, causing it to produce squawking sounds that reminded me of a ptar caught in the throat snare.
I recognized nothing. "What is this place?"
"Where it all began," Maggie said, and made a sweeping gesture with her hand. "Welcome to the Slow, Lazy Sax."
I breathed in. It smelled more vile than it looked. "I want to wake up now, please."
"You don't get a vote this time, Akkabarran." The Terran female handed her empty glass to a passing service drone and took my arm. "Over here. We
need to talk."
With her usual indifference to my feelings, Maggie dragged me around the tables and Terrans to a dark corner and shoved me into one of the chairs.
Before she sat down, she obtained another beverage and put it in front of me.
"Stop looking as if I'm going to hit you," she said, templing her red-nailed fingers. "I came to rescue your submissive little ass."
"Why? I'm on oKia, sleeping next to my husband, who would kill anything that tries to touch me." A pity he couldn't enter my dreams. "I'm not in any
danger."
"Clueless as ever." Maggie looked down at her drink and began toying with the plas stick, spearing the two dull green seed pods floating in the liquid.
"Can I interest you ladies in a personal encounter?" A humanoid-sized drone stopped beside us and unfastened the front of the tunic draped over its
chassis to display its artificial muscles.
I frowned. "What?"
"I saw you looking at me." The drone grabbed my shoulder and squeezed it. "You know you want it."
"I didn't look at you." I shoved the appendage away.
It braced a hand on the sticky surface of the table. "I am programmed for one- to nine-hour sessions, and can accommodate multiple partners."
I stared up at its lifeless, handsome face. "What does this thing want?"
"It wants to have sex with you." Maggie gave me a sour grin. "Or me. Or both of us. It's a sex drone."
"Get away from us," I told the machine.
"Thank you for your consideration." It moved on.
"I never cared for that model," Maggie said idly as she watched it solicit the interested young male occupying the next table. "Too heavy-handed.
Whoever programmed it must have had a taste for rough trade."
"What danger am I in, Maggie?" I demanded. "Will I die of boredom in the next five minutes?"
She laughed. "One reason we're so fond of your species--other than the mesmerizing amount of narcissism you're capable of--is your tenacity. You hold
on to life with white-knuckled fists, and you just won't let go. For a bunch of puny, weak primates who still like to kill as often as you breed, that is
astounding. No matter what the cosmos throws at you--plagues, famines, climate changes, planetary disasters--you do whatever it takes to survive."
"All species struggle for the right of existence," I said. "Terrans are no different from them."
"Trust me, you are. We should know. We tried to wipe you out a few times." Maggie used her teeth to remove one of the dull green seeds from the stick.
"Like the time we diverted a decent-sized asteroid toward prehistoric Terra, and flash-fried North America and everything on it. The few cave dwellers who
weren't turned into charcoal endured incredible hardships, relocated, and started breeding again, like nothing happened. Then there was my favorite, the
bubonic plague. That came with a personal guarantee from the manufacturer to wipe out all sentient life on the planet. About half of you died, and the other
half? Went and developed immunity to it."
"I don't believe you," I told her. "You couldn't have done those things."
"Oh, sweetie, it wasn't malicious," she assured me. "We were simply trying to keep you out of the mix. The grand plan didn't allow for a bunch of clever
apes from a hellstar system meddling in things they didn't understand. But despite our best efforts, you evolved into the biggest bunch of troublemakers
since the slugs that would one day become the Hsktskt crawled out of the primordial soup."
Her insensitivity made any further discussion pointless. "Can I go now?"
Her green eyes flashed up, bright and narrow. "Your charming doormat qualities make me forget sometimes what lies beneath them. I can't do anything
about you or the danger you're in, sweetheart, so a warning would be totally useless."
I didn't say anything. When Maggie spoke of things I didn't understand, silence seemed the best response.
"Such a trooper." Her smile turned vicious. "How did you like the crystal dream?"
"Not at all."
"Can't blame you there. When the universe decides to fuck with your head, it doesn't do it halfheartedly." Now she seemed to be avoiding my gaze.

"Despite what we did to your species in the past, we Jxin actually believe in the laws of survival. You fight for life; you earn it. You win; you should get to
keep it. It's always been our schtick, and, pains in the ass that Terrans are, eventually we had to accept that you deserved the right to exist. Remember
that the next time you dream of crystal."
To be polite, I took a sip of the drink. It tasted vile. "What do they mean? The dreams?"
"Believe it or not, it's kind of an apology." She bared some teeth. "Aka, things have not gone according to plan, we're all very sorry about that, blah,
blah, blah."
She was lying. I could do the same. "Then I thank you for your concern."
"Don't even go there." Maggie reached across the sticky surface of the table and seized my arm. "If I could have killed you the moment that stupid skela
bitch shot Cherijo in the head, I would have. I knew--we all knew--that you should have never been born. But once you're here, baby, you get your very own
bill of rights. No matter who you are or what body you possess. So say the Jxin."
Like her words, her grip was meant to hurt.
"I am sorry that Cherijo died." I leaned forward. "But I live, and I am not giving up my husband, my child, my body, or my life. They belong to me now."
"No being undergoing a dimensional transformation preserves its sense of spatial relation," Maggie said flatly in Shon's voice.
Something pushed at the bottom of my footgear, and I glanced down. The seven-pointed apex of a crystal had pierced the pitted surface of the flooring
and was thrusting itself up through it. It rose so fast I had to shove back my chair to keep it from impaling me.
Terrans knocked over tables and chairs as they ran to escape a hundred other crystal columns shooting up through the foundation. A crystal silenced
the drone making the squawking noise and crushed it between two other columns. The explosion of its power core lit the room with a burst of yellow
sparks.
I turned, trying to see an exit, and saw Maggie's image reflected on the surface of the largest and widest of the crystal pikes. Then she pressed her
hands against it--from the inside.
I picked up the chair I had been sitting in and smashed it against the surface of the crystal. That failed to leave even a scratch.
"Maggie." I placed my hand on the outside of the crystal, which felt like blue ice. "Can you hear me?"
A web of cracks appeared under my palm and spread out jaggedly in all directions, causing irregular shards to fall from the column. Inside, Maggie
underwent her own transformation; her red hair turned black and her features refined themselves into a non-Terran countenance.
"As you have fought for us, child of mind." Her fingertips touched mine through one of the flaws. "So will we fight for you."
Blackness.
I sat up, my body shaking, my skin slick with sweat. The icy air inside the shelter tried to freeze it and my tear-streaked face. I looked over and saw
Reever was still sleeping, and slipped out of the blankets, taking care not to let the cold get under them.
I left the shelter and walked out into the frigid night. The sky above the encampment stretched wide and dark blue; the thin atmosphere made the stars
seem enormous.
I went to the fire pit, the flames of which had died down to a glowing pile of scarlet embers, and sat on the edge of the still-warm stones to wait for the
dawn.

Thirteen
Just before the sun rose, I returned to the kiafta and woke Reever, who prepared a quick meal while I read ied what we would need to take on the trek.
"Here." He placed a bowl of cooked grain on the stone table, and then winced. "Can you give me an analgesic? I can't seem to get rid of this
headache."
"Of course." I retrieved a syrinpress and, after scanning him to ensure that the pain was not from another cause, administered the drug. "What brought
this on?"
"I think the smoke from the cooking fires," he said. "The smell of burning meat does not have pleasant associations for me."
Qonja and Hawk soon joined us, as did Uorwlan, who seemed much more relaxed and happy. Of Jylyj I saw nothing until he arrived with Seno's guide,
an experienced scout who said little and seemed impatient to leave.
As she played a male in front of the oKiaf, Uorwlan couldn't show much affection to the Skartesh. Still, she hovered around him and used any excuse to
touch him. For the most part Jylyj ignored her, although once or twice I caught him giving her a faintly exasperated look.
With the guide at the front, we left the encampment and traveled north, using another old path through the groves of heartwood. The air began to warm a
little as we emerged from the trees into a narrow clearing around the base of the two facing cliffs, both of which were so tall that I nearly had to bend
backward to see their snow-covered tops. Beyond them the mountains stood like worn monuments, each forming an uneven procession that never ended
but disappeared over the horizon.
The guide halted at the entrance to the cliff pass and spoke in a low voice to Jylyj, who nodded and turned to Reever.
"The scout says that stones sometimes fall from the sides of the cliffs in the summer season," the Skartesh told my husband. "We must move quickly
now, but if you hear stone cracking, go to the face of the cliffs and stay there."
The guide increased his pace to a trot, and I held on to the straps of my pack as I tried to keep up. My short legs had to take two strides to match one of
the others', and by the time we emerged from the pass my face and longshirt were damp with sweat.
A secluded valley stretched out before us, the red soil completely covered by reedlike amber grass with three-sided seed heads. Here and there I saw
the broad-leafed blue plants with the white berries, but no trees grew here. All through the heartwood we had heard the rustling of animals in the brush, but
here the silence seemed almost eerie.
"This is the tribe's burial ground?" Reever asked. The Skartesh nodded. My husband said something to the guide, who didn't seem to understand him.
To Jylyj, Reever said, "Ask him where the graves are, so that we won't walk over them."
"There are no graves," the Skartesh said after conferring with the guide. "I believe they bring the bodies of the dead here and leave them on the ground
to decompose naturally."
"Then the place should be littered with bones," I said.
"It feels as if it is." Uorwlan looked about and wrapped her arms around herself. "I don't see any remains. Do you hear that humming?"
Reever listened and then looked down. "No, but I can feel something in the ground." He took out a scanner and used it, turning in a slow circle. "There is
something vibrating under the soil."
"We should try to signal the Sunlace," Qonja said. "We told the captain we would relay our status every morning."
I glanced at the guide. "We agreed not to use our equipment in front of the natives."
"Seno said the exposed deposit of shining stones was somewhere over there," Jylyj said, pointing to one side of the cliffs. "I will go with the scout and
see if we can locate it. While we are gone, send your signal."
The oKiaf and the Skartesh walked off, while Reever set down his pack and took out the small transceiver. After calibrating it several times, he was able
to send off a brief signal. No reply came, however, and after a few moments he switched off the unit.
"Whatever is moving under the ground is also causing relay interference." He handed out scanners to Qonja, Hawk, and Uorwlan. "Walk along the
perimeter of the meadow and see what you can detect."
Reever and I walked carefully through the amber reed grass. While I looked for any signs of oKiaf remains, he scanned the surface.
"There are enormous deposits of a crystalline mineral under the soil," my husband said.
I caught my breath. "Black crystal?"
"No. It has far more benign readings--more like a form of quartz. I'm reading tons of it here."
We walked on, but after a few more meters, he stopped me.
"Don't go any farther. There are large subsurface faults filled with liquid all around us. The ground may collapse under us."
He knelt down and placed the end of a sampling probe into the soil, and watched it disappear as it burrowed into the ground. Then we retreated a safe
distance.
"Could it be graves?" I asked.
"No. The liquid isn't decompositional. It appeared to be mineral." He watched the scanner display as the probe began transmitting a vid of its progress.
The red soil in front of it fell away, and the probe dropped into a void half-filled with a pool of what looked like water.
The probe didn't sink but instead floated on the top of the fluid. All around it the liquid began to bloom with strange, feathery shapes, as if the probe's
presence had caused some sort of reaction. As we watched, the feathery shapes solidified into three-sided crystalline shafts.
Memories of being trapped in a pit made of a clear crystal rushed into my mind. "It looks like the Pel." The sentient, shape-changing crystal Cherijo had
encountered while forced to work as a slave doctor had been able to communicate telepathically with her, and had even helped her and Reever liberate
Catopsa.
"I thought the same thing, but it isn't the Pel," my husband said. "The liquid is some form of protocrystal, but unlike anything in the database."
The crystal growth increased at an alarming rate, until it replaced all of the liquid I could see in the void. "Why is it solidifying so fast?"
"Perhaps coming in contact with the probe's alloy housing caused a chemical reaction." Reever sighed as the vid from the probe grew blurry and then
disappeared. "That must be what's causing the transceiver to malfunction. The probe has stopped transmitting, too."
We met with the rest of the team back at the edge of the meadow and compared readings.
"This entire valley is honeycombed with deposits of solid and liquid crystal," Reever said after checking the others' scanners. "In some places the soil
barely covers it."
"This place makes my fur stand on end," Uorwlan said. "It's making my head ache, too. We should get out of here."
The guide appeared without Jylyj and began speaking to Reever, gesturing toward the area where he and the Skartesh had gone. I looked over but
couldn't see the resident.
"Wait." Reever took hold of the oKiaf's arm and concentrated. After a few moments he released him. "Jylyj slipped away from the guide. He says he
went into the forbidden area." He spoke to the oKiaf, who argued with him briefly before gesturing toward the tree line. "He'll track him. He says we have

to follow in his footsteps or we could be killed."
"By what?" To me, the meadow appeared completely deserted.
"I don't know," Reever admitted, "but he's terrified, and not just for himself."
We followed the guide in a single-file line as he skirted the meadow and approached the trees. As we passed the cliff face, I saw a section of rock that
had fallen away, and the glitter of crystal shining through the jagged dark red stone.
The heartwood trees at the edge of the meadow grew so thick that the trunks proved an effective barrier all on their own. The guide found a gap large
enough for us to squeeze through, but held us back and gave Reever a terse set of instructions.
"We have to leave our packs here," he said. Once we had placed everything on the ground, the guide reluctantly led us into the thicket.
We had gone only a short distance before the trees ended and another, smaller clearing appeared, shadowed by an outcropping of red stone that
seemed to hang over it like a protective roof. The guide stopped at the edge, scanned the area, and then went still. Backing away, he turned and issued
sharp orders to Reever.
"He says we have to go back to the encampment," my husband translated. He then spoke in oKiaf to the guide, who made a violent gesture. "He won't
allow us to go any farther."
I heard a faint sound coming from behind the guide's back, and moved to the side to have another look. From this angle I could see a large open pit in
the ground. I also heard the sound of a man groaning. "I hear him. Jylyj is in there."
When I tried to go past the guide, he grabbed my arms and pushed me back.
"He must have fallen into the pit," I said, pulling away and turning to Reever. "Tell him we have to get him out of there."
My husband spoke to the guide, who turned and began shouting at him.
I didn't waste any more time, but dodged around the guide and ran into the clearing. Under my feet the ground seemed to shift, collapsing in places the
way ice did during the thaw after winter. I moved fast, jumping over the voids that began to form in front of me until I made it to the edge of the pit.
When I looked down, the glitter of crystal hurt my eyes. There, in the center of the pit, lay Jylyj, his body impaled on dozens of crystal shafts.
Later, I would wonder why I did as I did at that moment. I would go over it a thousand times and still not know what made me act. But when I saw Jylyj, his
body bleeding from dozens of wounds, I stopped thinking and jumped into the pit.
I landed on my feet after the three-meter drop, but the sharp points of the crystal apexes didn't penetrate my footgear. Instead, they shattered under the
impact of my landing as if made of thin ice. Above my head I heard shouts, but only bent over the Skartesh, working my fingers under his mane to check
his pulse.
His dark eyes opened. "Leave me and go."
"I'd be happy to, but I don't think I can jump back out," I said. I lifted my head and called out, "He's fallen onto some crystal but he's still alive. I need my
pack, something to cut him free, and some ropes so we can lift him out of here."
"You can never free me," Jylyj said. "Leave me here, Jarn. It is the only way for me."
Something was glowing under his shirt, and I ripped it open to see two golden streaks in his fur, both giving off a cool white light. My eyes widened as
the crystal shafts that had stabbed through his body turned white with the light from the marks in his fur, and then began shrinking back into the wounds
they had inflicted. As Reever appeared above us at the edge of the pit, the shafts disappeared, and Jylyj's body collapsed against the now-flat bottom.
"Jarn."When I looked up, Reever tossed my pack down to me. I caught it neatly. "How badly is he injured?"
I looked at the wounds on the Skartesh's chest, which were also shrinking. "I don't know, but he's lost a lot of blood. Duncan, we have to get him out of
here now."
My husband nodded. "Qonja and Hawk are rigging some ropes to the trees. Tie him to you, and we'll pull you both out."
While I waited for the ropes, I took a syrinpress from my pack and administered a painkiller. The Skartesh opened his eyes as soon as he felt the
infusion and glared at me.
"You're wasting your drugs." He ducked his head and looked down at the glowing marks on his fur. "Look at this. Look at what you've done."
"What I've done? I only jumped in here." I took his vital signs, which were weak but steady. "You seem to be doing all the healing yourself." When he said
nothing, I added, "Is this why your patients recover so quickly? Are you some sort of touch healer?"
He made a disgusted sound and closed his eyes.
By the time Reever lowered the ends of two ropes, Jylyj had fallen unconscious. I turned him on his side and worked the rope under his arms and then
lay down and faced him as I wrapped it around me, pulled it tight, and knotted it. I grabbed my pack, wedged it between us, and then rolled onto my back,
holding him against me as I called up to my husband.
"Ready."
The ropes bit into my sides as they began hauling us up from the bottom of the pit. On the way up, Jylyj groaned a few times but never regained
consciousness, and when Reever reached in to take my outstretched hand, my longshirt and leggings were soaked with Skartesh blood.
Reever cut the ropes, and Qonja and Hawk lifted Jylyj between them.
"Take him," my husband said. "Quickly."
I was about to warn them about the treacherous ground when I saw all the collapsed areas were filled with pools of a white liquid. I turned my head and
saw the pit was filling with the same.
"Duncan," Uorwlan called out. She sounded scared. "Move it."
I looked down and saw the liquid crystal erupting through the soil, spreading and covering and solidifying over everything it touched. Reever lifted me off
my feet, held me against his chest, and ran for the trees. He jumped over a stream of the liquid crystal, just clearing it before we were in the shelter of the
trees. I looked over his shoulder and saw shafts sprouting up like plants.
The guide nearly ripped my husband's sleeve as he pulled us away from the clearing. With a final look, Duncan turned and carried me through the
grove.
When we reached the meadow, the guide reluctantly allowed us to stop and catch our breath. Reever put me on my feet, and I opened my pack as I
went to where Qonja and Hawk had laid Jylyj on the ground.
I scanned him three times and then pulled back his garments to see the wounds for myself. No longer bleeding or open, they were all now thick scars.
As I touched one, I felt it softening and watched it disappear into his flesh. Tiny hairs began to grow, covering the new skin.
I glanced up at my husband. "He heals like I do."
"Maggie once told Cherijo that her people had made others like her," Reever said, his voice tight. "He must be one of them."
Uorwlan loomed over the Skartesh. "He'll be all right, won't he?"
I realized that she and the others hadn't seen Jylyj impaled on the crystals as I had, and debated for a moment on what to tell her. If the Skartesh had
been created to be like me, he had probably gone to great lengths to conceal it.
"He has some internal injuries and he's lost a great deal of blood," I said at last. I'd only brought the most basic medical supplies with me; half of my
equipment remained in the shelter. "We have to get back to the encampment. If I can't cross-match a donor from the oKiaf, we'll have to evacuate him to

the ship."
"That's going to be difficult," Reever said. "When I went after you, I dropped my pack. It fell into one of the holes in the clearing. The crystal engulfed it
before I could retrieve it."
"I have one back at camp," Uorwlan said. "You can use it to signal your people."
The guide called to Reever as he dragged several branches from the thicket.
"He says we can make a litter to carry him," my husband said. "Uorwlan, get three of those blue broad-leaf plants. Qonja, Hawk, gather some strong
vines." He glanced at me. "What do you need?"
"A hospital." I checked Jylyj's pulse, which remained weak. "He seems to be holding on, but hurry."
The guide and Reever stripped the branches of their leaves while the others gathered the plants from the meadow. I watched as the men built a long,
narrow frame by lashing short and long branches together with vines at the cross sections. The guide punched holes with a dagger through the tough
edges of the broad-leafed blue plants and lashed them across the frame, creating a supporting surface for Jylyj's body. Uorwlan reinforced it by
volunteering her cloak, which Reever draped over the frame before the men brought the makeshift litter over to me.
I showed them how to lift him, and then secured his body to the frame with pieces of the rope. Qonja and Hawk lifted one end of the frame, and Reever
and the guide the other. When I would have moved to the front to lead them toward the pass, Uorwlan shook her head.
"I'll take up the lead," she said, and pointed to the Skartesh. "You stay beside him."
We moved as fast as we could, but carrying Jylyj slowed the men, and the trek back to the encampment took twice as long. Several tribesmen ran out
as soon as we were spotted by the watch, and helped carry Jylyj to our kiafta.
"Put him on the platform," I said as I went to retrieve my supplies from the packs. When one of the tribesmen seized my arm, I glared at him. "Let go of
me."
He spoke to me in a sharp voice and gestured toward Jylyj, but released me as soon as Reever came over to us.
"They're angry. The guide told them Jylyj entered the forbidden area, and--in his words--woke up the crystal. To them, that is an unforgivable offense."
My husband then spoke at length to the tribesman, who seemed to calm a little but spoke sharply again before he strode out.
"What are they going to do?"
"Nothing. You can treat him." Reever rubbed his eyes with his fingers. "We have to leave, though, first thing in the morning."
"We have to leave as soon as Uorwlan can signal the Sunlace," I said as I went over to the platform. "I need to move him to the medical bay as soon as
possible."
"They won't allow Uorwlan to use her transceiver," my husband said. "They're contacting the Elphian to come and remove all of us from the planet."
My first priority was to examine Jylyj properly, so I drafted Hawk to serve as my assistant as I cut off the Skartesh's garments and began the visual
assessment. On the outside of his body I found patches of short, newly grown fur, the only indications of where he had been impaled on the crystal, and
counted twenty-eight separate wounds--all of which were healed over as if they had never happened.
I scanned his internal organs, from the top of his head to the pads of his paws, and found only a few traces of cellular disturbance. From the locations,
Jylyj had suffered life-threatening penetrating injuries to both lungs, his heart, liver, spleen, and one of his four kidneys, as well as a rupture of his stomach
and complete severing of his intestines in five different places.
From the extent of the injuries, he should have died almost instantly after jumping into that pit, and yet he had only a few lingering bruises and a mild
inflammation of the abdomen, as if he had just recovered from a minor case of gastric infection instead of what had to have been a terminal-level
peritoneal infection.
His remarkable ability to heal had not yet compensated for his blood loss, however, and as I ran the hematology scan, I found the expected drop in his
white and red blood cell count. He had lost a little over half of his blood supply; in a normal being that would call for an immediate transfusion. But while the
blood loss kept him unconscious and his vital signs weak, his body didn't seem to be suffering any other ill effects from it. Time and plenty of fluids would
probably allow his enhanced immune system to regenerate and replace all on its own what he had bled out.
I set up a portable monitor and put the Skartesh on a saline IV, and then tucked a coverlet around him.
"How did he lose so much blood?" Hawk asked. "There are no wounds on him anywhere."
"There were." I trusted Hawk, and he had too much medical knowledge to be fooled by any story I made up. "Jylyj's immune system is like mine. He
heals almost spontaneously."
"So that is his secret." The crossbreed gave the unconscious Skartesh a thoughtful look. "Qonja said there was something he wished to hide." He
frowned. "Joseph Grey Veil couldn't have made him, could he?"
I shook my head. "Cherijo's creator was not the only one responsible for making her the way she was. The Jxin female who pretended to be her mother
also had something to do with it. She claimed there were others made to fight the black crystal. Jylyj has to be one of them."
"That must be the reason he jumped into that pit," Hawk said. "No sane being would do so unless they were suicidal."
The only oKiaf who was permitted to enter the kiafta was Trewa, who kept her head down as she brought in food. I had never had the chance to repay
her for the gift of the bracelet, so I stopped her before she could leave.
Now that Reever had absorbed enough oKiaf to speak it, I could have asked him to interpret for me, but instead I removed the moonstone necklace
Hawk had given me and offered it without words.
Trewa touched the beads, looked down into my eyes, and inclined her head so I could place the necklace around her neck.
I grasped her paws with my hands and thanked her in oKiaf.
A guard looked in, making both of us jump, and Trewa quickly hurried out. I went back to Jylyj, and Reever met me beside the platform.
"Uorwlan has a short-range backup transceiver in her pack," he said, keeping his voice low. "It's not powerful enough to signal the Sunlace, but she can
send a relay to her shuttle pilot. He's ferrying supplies from the station and should be in orbit. He'll relay a message to Xonea."
I checked Jylyj's vitals, which had dropped enough to alarm me. "I thought he was stable, but he's getting weaker now. I don't think the oKiaf will
volunteer a donor, and the only cross-matched blood I have for him is on the Sunlace. I need to get him back to the ship."
"Xonea should be able to convince the Elphian of the urgency of the situation." He traced a half circle under my right eye. "You look exhausted. Let
Hawk watch him while you get a few hours of sleep."
"I'm fine." I kissed him. "Go, and don't let the guards catch you. We're in enough trouble already."
Darkness crept up around the kiafta as I watched over Jylyj. If the Jxin had created him with the same immune system I possessed, it had been
overloaded or was no longer working. With every passing hour, he grew a little weaker.
Hawk brought me something that I ate without tasting, and kept watch with me until I sent him to rest.
"I will need you fresh in the morning to help me transport him," I said when the crossbreed tried to protest.
"You will wake me if you need help," he insisted, and only after I gave him my word, reluctantly went to join Qonja in their shelter.
When I was alone with the Skartesh, I sat on the ground beside the platform and rested my head back against the edge of the grass-stuffed cushion. I
didn't tell Hawk that if Jylyj's condition didn't soon improve he would likely be helping me transport a corpse in the morning. I turned my head to look at the

monitors, and saw my patient watching me, his eyelids opened only to slits.
"We're back at the encampment," I told him. "Your wounds have healed."
"Not all," he whispered, his voice a thin thread of pain. "Why save me?"
Had he jumped into that crystal pit in hopes of killing himself? "I never learned how to let someone die. Did they teach you that in medical school?"
"No. Learned it before." He lifted a paw and touched my hair, threading the blunt ends of his claws through the strands. "Never met another like me.
Thought I was alone."
Suddenly, I understood many things. "Why didn't you tell me? Of all people, I would have understood."
"Angry. Afraid. The League . . . alterforming . . ." He drifted off for a moment, and then jerked back awake. "Jarn, after . . . destroy my body. Please."
He was afraid of the League, afraid of being discovered--and terrified of what they would do with his body. I had never considered what would happen if
immortal DNA was used to alterform a normal being. Was that to be my fate?
"I will." I pressed my hand over his paw. "I promise."

Fourteen
Reever returned alone, and after refusing the food Trewa had brought, sat with me to watch over Jylyj. I told him about the Skartesh's brief period of
consciousness, and what he had asked of me. Reever agreed that if Xonea couldn't get to us in time and we lost Jylyj, that we would at the first
opportunity send his body into the oKiaf's sun.
"I don't understand why he's dying," my husband said. "Cherijo explained most of the bioengineering that had been done to her, and from what she said
she couldn't bleed to death. Even if she sustained hundreds of wounds, her blood always clotted within a few seconds. If he is like her--like you--he should
have done the same."
"Something interfered with Jylyj's immune response," I said. "Perhaps the crystal impaling his body. Now something is preventing his bone marrow from
producing replacement cells. I've scanned him a dozen times, but I can't detect anything responsible for it. Here, see for yourself." I handed him the
scanner I had been using on the Skartesh.
Reever skimmed through the readings I had taken. "This is calibrated to read the body's cells and other organic substances. Can you adjust it to scan
for crystal?"
"I don't have to; it picks up trace minerals, as well," I said, frowning as I took back the device and isolated those readings. Normally, I wouldn't have paid
any attention to the minute amounts of minerals that were present in any living being's body, not unless some heavy metal contamination or poisoning was
suspected. I scrolled through the list and found a sizeable amount of one mineral had been detected in the bloodstream.
The scanner, which had not recognized it, listed it as unknown.
"I thought his body had forced the crystal out of it as it healed." Cursing myself for making such a stupid assumption, I recalibrated the scanner. "I need
to see the readings you took in the meadow today."
My husband retrieved the scanner he had used to detect the underground deposits of protocrystal, and handed it to me. I compared the compositional
readings and swore again.
"His body didn't reject the crystal," I said. "It absorbed it."
I ran another complete scan of Jylyj's body and looked at the mineral display. In the hour since I had performed my previous scan, the amount of liquid
protocrystal in his bloodstream had increased by two percent.
"It's still circulating through his body." I felt like throwing the scanner across the room. "And that's not all. It's growing."
Reever glanced down at the Skartesh. "Can it be removed?"
"I might be able to filter it out with dialysis, or a complete replacement transfusion." I tried to think, but all I could see was how the liquid crystal had
consumed the clearing in a matter of seconds. "Did you hear anything from Uorwlan's pilot? Is Xonea coming for us?"
"The pilot was able to transmit a brief relay. He'll arrive in a few hours and land outside the encampment. If the oKiaf will release us to him, he'll transport
us back to the station."
The tribe and the primitive conditions in which they lived no longer charmed me.
"Why do these people live like this?" I said, dragging a hand over my hot face. "They have no doctors, no proper medical facilities. Even on Akkabarr
we had healers, and all the medicines and supplies we could salvage from the wrecks."
"He's as strong as you are," Reever said. "He'll keep fighting it."
If he didn't turn into a chunk of crystal before the shuttle arrived. I thought of the heartwood trees, and how the crystal had stopped growing at the tree
line. "Do you still have the litter we used to carry Jylyj into the camp?"
My husband gestured toward the entry flap. "It's just outside."
"I need one of the heartwood branches from the frame." If I could discover what substance in the trees repelled the crystal, I might be able to synthesize
an agent that would stop it from spreading, or even help flush it out of his bloodstream.
After a brief conversation with the guards, Reever brought back a short branch from the litter. I cut a sliver from the raw end and placed it in the analyzer.
The results surprised me.
"It looks like wood on the inside, but it's mostly made of hardened resin." I felt bemused. "This branch is dead, and the resin is almost fossilized. No
wonder it takes forever to burn."
The analyzer began listing the elements and compounds it detected in the resin, all of which appeared ordinary: oxygen, nitrogen, carbon, hydrogen,
and so forth. Then the display showed a trace of an alloy, Cu2Au, which apparently accounted for the color of the wood.
"This tree absorbs two metals, copper and gold, from the ground," I said. "They combine into an alloy that is not present in the soil."
"Gold is harmless, but copper in large amounts can be poisonous to many living things." Reever studied the cut end of the branch. "It may bond the gold
to the copper to change its properties and keep it from accumulating and killing the tree."
"If that alloy does not occur naturally in the soil, it could be the deterrent we're looking for." I went to the platform and used a probe to draw a few drops
of blood from Jylyj, placing them in a vial and scanning them to confirm the presence of the protocrystal. As I did, Jylyj's blood began to crystallize.
Quickly, I extracted a sample of the Cu2Au alloy from the heartwood resin, and added it to the vial of blood. The crystallized blood instantly liquefied.
I scanned it. "The alloy dissolved the crystal. It's reverted to its liquid phase." I monitored the sample for a few minutes. "The crystal isn't growing. It's
gone inert."
"That may explain why the tribe uses so much wood to adorn themselves," Reever said. "Their luck carvings may be protocrystal repellent." He tapped
the bracelet I wore. "That may be what saved your life in the pit."
I paced back and forth as I thought it out. "I can't inject him with a copper alloy. He's not a tree; even a small amount would kill him." I studied my
bracelet, and the gleaming slivers of wood between the green beads. "I have an idea."
Convincing the guard to send for Trewa took Reever some time, but eventually he brought the oKiaf woman to our shelter. With Reever as my
interpreter, I told her about Jylyj's condition in simple terms, and asked for her help.
She stared at the Skartesh for a long time before she replied.
"She says he is being punished for waking the crystal," my husband translated. "But because we're strangers, and we didn't know what would happen,
she doesn't believe he deserves to die. She will go to the other women in the encampment and collect what she can."
Trewa left us, and I began putting together the equipment I needed. I couldn't build a complete dialysis unit from scratch, but with some tubing, an empty
IV unit, and parts of an infuser, I was able to put together a crude, portable version of one.
Trewa returned with a basket of the tiny heartwood carvings the women used for their ornaments, and Reever scanned them.
"They all contain traces of the Cu2Au alloy," he confirmed.
"Bring them here." I could only fit the smallest of the carvings into the empty IV unit, but there were enough to fill it halfway. Once I evacuated the air from
the lines, I inserted the needle at one end into the radial artery in Jylyj's right arm, and the needle at the other into the artery in his left. Once I enabled the

infuser port, which I had rewired to work in reverse, it began drawing the Skartesh's blood into the line attached to his right arm.
I watched his blood travel up to the IV unit, where it began to drip over the heartwood carvings inside the bag, and then fed down into the line that ran to
his left arm.
It seemed to take longer than it did. I kept running a continuous scan on the amount of protocrystal in his blood supply. Gradually, the growth rate slowed,
and then finally stabilized.
"It's working." I looked up at Trewa and nodded. "Tell her that she has saved his life."
As my husband translated, Trewa touched the moonstone necklace I had given her. She replied in a soft voice, gesturing to the Skartesh and then
gently cuffing my left shoulder.
"Trewa claims no one has ever survived going into the forbidden places," my husband told me. "She says Jylyj lives because of you."
The oKiaf woman ducked her head and twisted it from side to side, repeating two words several times.
"What is she saying?"
"I think she's given you a proper tribal name." Reever smiled a little. "Among the oKiaf, you will now be known as Crystal Healer."
Auto-infusing Jylyj with blood filtered through the heartwood carvings kept the crystal infection in check, and I felt confident enough to begin preparing
him for transport.
The guards came for Reever shortly after midnight to meet with Dnoc and Uorwlan's shuttle pilot, who had arrived and was negotiating with the chieftain
for our release.
"Wake everyone and have them prepare to go," my husband told me. "I don't think this is going to take very long."
It didn't. By the time Uorwlan and the rest of the team were dressed and packed, Reever returned with the pilot and an armed escort.
"We have to hightail out of here, Captain," the pilot, a very nervous little humanoid with pale green skin, told Uorwlan. "The Elphian are in total meltdown.
They're talking about shutting down all the trades now and keeping everyone out."
"I'll smooth things over with them," she promised.
Uorwlan's pilot had brought a litter from his shuttle, and as we shifted Jylyj from the sleeping platform onto it, he opened his eyes.
"Blood," he said, gazing at his arms and then up into my face. "Whose?"
"It's all yours." I secured the IV to the side of the litter and fastened restraints across his chest, abdomen and hips. "We've stabilized the infection. Once
I get you back to the Sunlace, we'll start cleaning the crystal out of your system."
Jylyj seized my wrist in a surprisingly strong grip. "You can't remove it from my body. It could infect the rest of the crew."
I exchanged a look with Reever. We knew the protocrystal was dangerous, but we hadn't considered what might happen after I removed it from the
Skartesh's body.
Jylyj said my name, and I smiled down at him. "We'll deal with the crystal later," I promised him. "Right now we're going on a little jaunt."
Qonja, Hawk, the pilot, and Reever carried Jylyj through the camp, with Uorwlan in the lead. Every adult in the erchepel came out of their shelters to
watch us go. As we passed some of the tribeswomen, they bowed their heads and murmured the tribal name Trewa had given me.
"Crystal Healer," I heard Jylyj murmur. "They think you are the legend."
"You never told me that story," I said, hoping to keep him conscious for the jaunt.
"When the Star Wolf died to create the tribe, the abundance of the world divided itself, too. Time became day and night, summer and winter, birth and
death. The stars could not repair the division, so they made a promise to the tribe that one day a healer would be born, one who could make everything
right again."
"How?"
"The myth doesn't specify an exact course of treatment," Jylyj said, his tone dry. "After the Crystal Healer is born, he--or she--becomes separated from
the tribe and wanders alone through the wilderness for many years. There the healer falls into a long slumber and dreams. When the tribe has made
enough sacrifices, the dream becomes time, and the healer travels through it to find the Star Wolf and heal him. As they are joined, so are the night and
day, and light and the darkness, and all that has been divided from what it was. The crystal healer brings the Star Wolf back to life, and together they recreate the tribe from the dreams they share with each other."
"It sounds like a lovely romance," I joked.
"It is why the oKiaf have never objected to the mataerel or litaerel," the Skartesh said. "It has always been believed that the Crystal Healer and the Star
Wolf were both males."
I chuckled. "Well, I am very flattered, but obviously I am not a male, and I don't think I can suture day and night back together."
"If you try, I want to assist." He coughed and closed his eyes.
Uorwlan's shuttle had landed in the same clearing the station pilot had left us, and while small, the vessel appeared well-armed.
"Are you expecting trouble?" I asked the Takgiba as I nodded toward the oversized pulse emitters mounted on three sides of the hull.
"A girl can't be too careful, especially when she hauls cargo." Uorwlan stopped as the door panels opened and a loading ramp extended. "Linag, did
you leave the ship on auto?"
"I couldn't say no, Captain." The pilot's fearful eyes darted toward the shuttle. "They held a rifle to my head. They said they'd kill me if I didn't."
A group of men in battle armor poured out of the shuttle. All of them carried pulse rifles, which they trained on us.
"Who the hell are you?" Uorwlan shouted.
One of the men fired at the ground in front of her, and then raised his weapon and targeted her face. "Shut up and get on board. All of you. Now."
"Mercenaries?" Uncaring of the threat, the Takgiba turned to her pilot. "You let mercenaries hijack my shuttle?"
I felt air sweep over my back as Hawk took off. Some of the men fired at him, but he flew too fast for them to bring him down. A moment later he
disappeared around the side of the mountain.
I reached for my blades, but Reever put his hand on my wrist and shook his head.
"Too many to fight," he murmured. "Do as they say."
We were marched onto the shuttle and herded in the back cargo area, where one of the mercenaries confiscated our weapons. Another reached down
and yanked the needles out of Jylyj's arms, then pushed him off the litter in order to remove that.
"Stop it." I rushed over to the Skartesh. "He's badly injured. He needs that IV." I tried to grab it back, but the mercenary hit me so hard I fell to the deck.
When he drew his foot back to kick me, Reever came at him and knocked him across the hold.
"Back away," the other mercenary said, shoving the end of his rifle into my husband's belly when Reever kept advancing toward the semiconscious
merc. "Back away, or I'll cut you in half."
"Duncan, he'll do it." Uorwlan hauled Reever by the arm over to me. "Take care of your wife." She turned to the mercenary, who was helping his dazed
companion get to his feet. "What do you want? Cargo? Credits? Let's work this out and no one has to get hurt."
"We have what we want." The mercenary shoved his companion out of the hold and then backed out himself, closing and securing the door panel as
soon as he was on the other side.

Reever helped me up from the deck. "Are you all right?"
"Yes." I went back to Jylyj, who was curled over on his side. "Who are they?" I demanded of the pilot. "How did they get on the shuttle?"
"They intercepted me in orbit," he said. "They used some kind of docking clamp to immobilize me.They were on board before I knew it." He gave
Uorwlan a helpless look. "They took out the transceiver and grabbed Pellan and took him on their ship. They said they'd kill him if I warned you."
"Raiders." Uorwlan began to curse softly and paced around the cargo hold.
Qonja took off his cloak and covered Jylyj with it as I checked his vitals. "Can he survive without the IV?"
"Not long." I braced myself against the deck as the shuttle began to lift off. "They must be after the bounty. We have to convince them to leave Jylyj and
the others at the station." An unexpected jolt nearly threw me to the deck again. I barely righted myself before the ship rocked violently again. "What's
happening?"
Uorwlan ran over to the viewport. "The shuttle's surrounded. They're firing at the stabilizers."
"Who is?" Reever demanded.
She turned and looked at him. "The oKiaf."
Pulse-fire bursts began to hammer on the outside of the hull, and something exploded at the back of the shuttle. It dropped back to the ground and
lurched to one side.
"There go my stabilizers." Uorwlan looked around the hold. "Linag, remind me to stow some weapons in with the cargo next time."
"We're all going to die," the pilot muttered, cowering and covering his green head with his four arms.
I heard shouts and the pounding of footsteps as the mercenaries tried to get off the ship. More pulse fire erupted, along with terrible screams. After a
long silence, someone opened the door to the cargo hold and ordered us out.
Reever went first, shielding me and Qonja with his body as we supported Jylyj between us. Uorwlan followed. We stumbled down the damaged loading
ramp and found the ground outside the ship littered with the bodies of dead mercenaries. A small group of survivors stood to one side, their hands
clasped behind their heads.
A ring of oKiaf in League battle armor and carrying pulse rifles completely surrounded the shuttle.
"Thank you," Reever said to the tribesman who stepped up to us.
"Be silent." The oKiaf pointed his rifle at my husband as several light shuttles began descending all around the clearing. "You will come with us now."
The strange oKiaf herded us and the surviving mercenaries onto their shuttles, dividing us up as they did so. I protested as Jylyj was taken from us by
two of the tribesmen, but they ignored me.
"Let me go with him," I said to the leader. "He's hurt, and I'm a healer."
"We will care for him," was all he said.
We were directed to sit in the passenger area of the shuttle, where two guards stood watching us. A few minutes later, the oKiaf launched back into the
air, flying away from the clearing and into the mountains. Although they didn't try to harm us, they refused to speak to us and made it obvious that they
considered us their prisoners.
"It seems not all the tribes abandoned the evils of technology," I said in a low voice to Reever as we inspected the two oKiaf standing guard. "Those
rifles are new. So are these vessels."
"They must be the Elphian watchers left behind to guard the tribes on-planet," he murmured. "They probably use surface scanners to monitor landings
and launches."
"The attack was none of our doing," Qonja said. "Surely they will be reasonable about this."
"They have the rifles," I pointed out. "They can be as unreasonable as they like." I glanced through the viewport at the launch where they had taken Jylyj.
"I have to talk to their healers as soon as we land."
And explain what happened before the crystal infection spread.
The launches didn't land in a clearing or anywhere on the surface, but flew through a series of narrow passes and finally down to a lake at the base of a
roaring waterfall cascading down the side of one enormous mountain. I caught my breath as they plunged through the falls and into a wide, long cavern
that had been converted into a launch bay.
I saw dozens more launches on the deck of the bay, and hundreds of oKiaf working on them or moving around them. I also spotted well-stocked racks
of weapons and other ordnance before I turned to my husband. "Duncan, this is a military base."
He glanced at the guards. "They behave like well-trained soldiers on patrol. Now we have to find out what their orders are."
It didn't take long to do that. As soon as the shuttles landed, we were ordered out of the ship and escorted across the deck to where three oKiaf in
strange-looking uniforms waited.
The tallest one in the center spoke first. "We are the Valtas. You are in violation of our laws."
"We were attacked by those men and taken prisoner as we tried to leave the planet," Reever said, and nodded toward the group of mercenaries being
herded toward a passage leading away from the bay. "We came to oKia as part of a scientific expedition. We have no interest in committing violence or
engaging in any conflict with you."
The Valtas leader didn't seem convinced. "You will be held and questioned."
"I've been trading peacefully with the tribes for years," Uorwlan said. When the leader didn't reply, she added, "You're not putting me in a cell."
"You'll do as you're told. Cooperate, and you will not be harmed." The leader gestured for the guards.
"One of our team members was taken to another shuttle," I said quickly. "He is badly injured. I am a healer, and I can take care of him."
"We have our own healers."
As one of the guards took my arm, I said, "He's infected with the liquid crystal from one of your forbidden areas. I know how to keep it from killing him. If
you'll just let me talk to your healers, I can explain the treatment to keep him stabilized."
Now I had his attention. After he studied my face for a few moments, he inclined his head a few degrees. "I will send someone from medical to speak
with you."
We were taken from the launch bay through a passage that ran straight through the dark red stone of the mountain and into another, much larger cavern.
Here a small city had been built, but in a much different fashion than the abandoned places we had seen on the surface.
Triads of kiafta-shaped permanent shelters made of alloy and stone took up nearly every inch of the cavern floor, interspersed here and there with what
appeared to be modified storage buildings. Instead of roads, a complex system of rails hung over the city, on which small glidecars traveled. Everything
appeared to be compact, to make the best use of the space available, but it was obvious from the visible activity that thousands of oKiaf inhabited this
strange underground settlement.
"They didn't leave their cities," I said to my husband. "They just hid them."
"All these years I've had to bunk down in the dirt with the tribes, when I could have stayed here." Uorwlan looked disgusted.
The guards took us to a glidecar and drove us across the city railings to a structure in the center of the cavern. Unlike the triad dwellings, this building
stood alone and had guards posted at every entrance.

From the glidecar we were taken in through a side entrance and down a series of corridors to a row of rooms not unlike the quarters on board the

Sunlace. The guards then tried to separate us.
"The women stay with us," my husband said.
The guards conferred with each other, and then allowed Uorwlan to go with Qonja, and me to go with Reever.
"Do not try to escape," one of them warned as we entered the room. "If you are found outside this room without a proper escort, you will be shot on
sight."
Uorwlan backed away from the room. "No," she said in a strangled voice. "I won't do it."
"They're not slavers," Reever said quickly, trying to go to her. When the guard stepped in his way, he grabbed his arm. "She used to be enslaved. When
she disobeyed, her owner would lock her up and starve her, sometimes for weeks. She's remembering that. Let me go to her. I can calm her."
"I'm not afraid." Now Uorwlan sounded furious as she swiped her claws at the guard trying to force her into the room. "I didn't break the law. Let me out
of here."
The oKiaf guard slung his weapon over his shoulder and grabbed the Takgiba, who drove her head into his chest and then up, smashing her skull into
his jaw. That broke his hold, and she knocked him over onto his back, ripping into him with her claws.
"Uorwlan," Reever called, trying again to get past the guard.
More armed oKiaf flooded into the corridor, and it took four of them to pull the feline off the bleeding guard. They dragged her off her feet and carried
her into the room.
Qonja looked over at Reever. "I will try to help her."
"Talk to her. Remind her that this is only temporary," Duncan called back as we were forced into our room. He then spoke to the guard. "I need to see
your leader again. I must negotiate for our release."
"Your female attacked without provocation," the guard informed him. "None of you are going to be released now."
Uorwlan began to scream, a sound that was abruptly cut off as the door closed and we were locked in the chamber.

Fifteen
Reever tried to listen at the wall between our chambers, and then to shout through it, but the rooms had been soundproofed. If Uorwlan was still shrieking,
we couldn't hear it.
"She will be all right," I told him. "Qonja is an experienced psychologist. He heard what you said; he will know what to do." I recalled Hawk's escape.
"Do you think Hawk will be able to find us, or bring help?"
"Not from the oKiaf, and he can't fly Uorwlan's shuttle, not without repairing the stabilizers." He sat down on the sleeping platform and rested his head in
his hands. "Even if he does, the bounty hunters have found us. They'll attack any vessel we travel on. We're probably safer here."
I checked the room's storage containers, but found only some nonperishable ration packs that had been left in them. "If you're hungry, there are field
rations." I checked the container markings. "These are new, like the shuttles and the weapons. They're not League, either."
"They haven't abandoned their advanced civilization," Reever said. "They've moved it, perhaps redesigned it, but they're definitely protecting it. The
tribes who live on the surface must be the camouflage, to fool the League and anyone else who comes here into believing this story about the oKiaf
reverting to the old ways."
"I never had the sense that they were acting like primitives for our benefit," I said. "The tribe seemed very natural and happy."
"I'm sure they were, just as I'm convinced the erchepel is only a vacation spot." He saw my expression. "It's when civilized people go into wilderness
areas and live as their ancestors did for short periods of time. On Terra, it's called camping out."
I made a rude sound. "On Akkabarr, it's called life."
A guard entered the room with an oKiaf wearing a physician's tunic that had been altered to resemble the other Valtas's military-style uniforms. He was
an older male with a lean face and the infinitely weary gaze of someone who had served on many battlefields.
"You are the healer who treated the Skartesh for crystal exposure?" he asked me. When I nodded, he gestured to the guard, who reopened the
chamber door to admit Jylyj, who looked thin and shaky but was walking under his own power.
"You will tell me what you did to suspend the crystal's growth," the healer said.
I began to, and then I thought better of it. "I would be happy to share my findings." I paused, looking into those tired old eyes. "As soon as we are
released."
"I cannot give the order to release you, not when I have a guard you wounded in my infirmary." The healer turned to Jylyj. "Things would go better for you
if you tell what she did."
"I cannot remember," the Skartesh said. "I was unconscious."
"I can have the men beat it out of you," the healer said, stepping closer to me.
"Signal your staff first," my husband said, also moving in. "In a few moments they will be quite busy."
"It's all right, Duncan. It's interesting to see how an oKiaf physician honors his oath." I regarded the angry oKiaf. "We have a word for men like you." I
turned to Jylyj. "How do you say fool in their language?"
The Skartesh didn't look at me but bared his teeth at the medical officer. "Slizac."
Another guard came in and murmured something to the medical officer, who gestured toward Jylyj. "He is coming with us. I suggest you reconsider, if
you wish to ever leave oKia."
"He's not well enough to be questioned," I snapped. "Surely even you can see that."
"I do not make these decisions. Our commander has sent for him; he must go." He hesitated, and then added, "I will escort him and make it clear that
he is to be treated carefully."
I abandoned my attempt to bargain for our release. "Let me accompany you to medical, and I'll show you the process I used."
"It will have to be after he is questioned." Without listening to any more of my protests, the medical officer and the guards took Jylyj and left us locked in
the chamber.
"Come here," Reever said as soon as we were alone, and took me in his arms as if to comfort me, and established a link. They are monitoring us; I
count five drones embedded in the light emitters and the furnishings. He slipped one hand between us and passed one of the daggers he kept in his
leggings to me. When they come for us, I'm going to insist we be taken together. Don't try to run, but go along with them. As soon as I see an

opportunity to escape, I'll disable the guards.
Try not to kill them. I quickly tucked the blade into my belt. What about Qonja and Uorwlan?
He'll look after her until we can come back for them or find a way to have them released. He smoothed the disheveled hair away from my face. How
long can Jylyj live without the blood treatment?
I can only guess. I rested my cheek against his shoulder. Maybe another day or two.
Reever kissed my brow. Then we have to take him with us.
The oKiaf monitoring us saw us only sit together in silence as if comforting each other. Through our link, however, we discussed everything we had seen
during the transport from the launch bay to the holding chamber, and what might be the best route out of the underground city.
By the time we had put together a tentative plan of escape, the guards came for us.
Rather than being taken to an interrogation chamber, Reever and I were led outside the building to one of the storage structures surrounding it. There
the Valtas's commander stood watching two subordinates and several drones stock shelves with boxes of new rations. He turned as soon as he heard
our approach.
"Leave us," he said to the guards. When they withdrew, he turned to Reever and gestured toward a stone path. "Walk with me."
I didn't like being treated like a guest, not when it had been made so obvious that we weren't. "Why?"
"I am taking you to medical," the commander said. "You are needed there. Along the way, I would speak with your mate about matters that concern you
both. Is this acceptable, or should I have you returned to your quarters?"
His politeness dumbfounded me, but Reever agreed and followed him away from the food storage area.
"These caverns had existed for millennia," the commander said. "They hold great fascination for the people, and throughout time our tribes have
searched for passages into them to explore their secrets. Maps were drawn and handed down for many generations." He stopped at one of the stone
markers and looked out at the diminutive city. "When it came time to deal with the League, we knew these places would serve best as the shelters of our
future."
Reever seemed puzzled. "So you deceived them into thinking you abandoned technology in order to hide here?"
"It was not a deception. We left all that they had bestowed upon us on the surface." The commander glanced up at the cavern ceiling before regarding
my husband. "Everything you see was made or manufactured by the oKiaf."

"That's why the rations in our cell were new," I gestured toward the city. "But why move underground? Why not set up defenses on the surface and in
orbit?"
"It has nothing to do with the League, or rather it has everything to do with keeping the League away from oKia." He glanced at me. "No offworlder
knows what I am to tell you now."
"We are your prisoners," Reever said. "Why tell us?"
"I have been convinced that you can be trusted." The commander's voice turned hard. "I pray I have not been misled."
The commander began to talk about the destruction of Skart near the end of the war between the Allied League and the Hsktskt Faction.
"The polarization of our orbits around our sun protected oKia from being bombarded by the planetary debris. The remains of Skart were vaporized
before they could reach us. We thought we were safe, until the tribes began sending word of hunters falling into pits that opened beneath their feet, and
being made into shining stone."
"The crystal," Reever murmured.
The commander nodded. "We have shared our world with the crystal since the Star Wolf created the first tribe. It has always been found in a solid form.
But we now believe that the energy released by the destruction of Skart has caused it to change."
Reever's eyes narrowed. "By change you mean it can now convert itself to liquid form."
The commander inclined his head. "The deposits that you and your team found in the mountains are spreading beneath the surface of our planet. Every
year they claim more of the land from the trees and the animals that sustain us. "If our scientists do not discover how to stop the growth of the crystal and
safely remove it from oKia, in a few decades it will engulf the entire planet."
"Why would you keep such a disaster secret?" Reever asked. "There are scientists on thousands of world who might help you find a solution."
"This is our world and our problem," the commander said.
"You're afraid to tell anyone," I said, seeing once more in my mind the crystal spreading over the clearing. "You think the League will try to take the
crystal from oKia and use it as a weapon."
"The crystal has already consumed other worlds." His light eyes met mine. "If the League discovered it here, in its liquid form, nothing would stop them.
They would invade oKia to mine it, and kill everyone who got in their way."
The paranoia and isolationism practiced by the oKiaf seemed more rational to me now. "Have you made any progress in finding a solution?"
The commander shook his head. "We have found nothing that destroys the crystal. It kills every living thing it touches. We know that Cu2Au repels it;
large deposits of the alloy left behind by ancient forests are what protect these caverns. But even that will not save us for long.
"When the crystal covers the surface of our world, all of our food sources will die. The oxygen once shed into our atmosphere by the plants will dwindle
and disappear, and the surface temperature will drop. Then oKia will die, and take us all into the belly of the stars."
"You have enough ships to evacuate the planet before that happens," my husband pointed out. "You can leave your world, as the Skartesh did, and
make a home for your people on a new planet."
The commander shook his head. "Even if we were to send away enough of our people to keep our species alive, the League would learn of it and wish
to know what drove them from our world. They would come with their ships and their probes. We could not hold them off for long."
"They will do that after you're gone," I predicted.
"There will be nothing left for them to take," the commander replied. "When the crystal has taken over oKia completely, it will solidify around it and go
back to sleep. Nothing can reawaken it once it has eaten a world."
Memories Reever had given me of the year Cherijo had spent on Catopsa flooded into my thoughts. The depot world had been made of the Pel crystal.
After he and Cherijo had freed the slaves from the prisons there, the Pel had changed into its liquid form and devoured the slave depot. I opened my
mouth to tell the commander this, but felt Reever take my hand in his.

Say nothing yet of Catopsa.
"This is a very dangerous secret," my husband said. "Why are you trusting us with it?"
"Your mate, and the miracle she performed on your interpreter," the commander said. "Before him, no one has ever survived exposure." He turned to
me. "Dnoc says you are the Crystal Healer of legend. I do not know if that is true or not, for you are a female, but you did save the life of the Skartesh. Now
we would ask that you help us save our world."
The commander escorted us by glidecar to the Valtas's central medical facility, located in one of the largest triad structures in the city. At the entrance
the medical officer I had met in our chamber waited, and greeted me with a dour glare.
"Your patient has been a great trial to us," he said as he led us through the assessment area and back into the treatment rooms. "He refuses to let
anyone examine him but you. I would have sedated him, but for his condition."
I stopped in front of the isolation chamber, and through the viewer saw Jylyj's shadow behind a modesty curtain. "What were you able to do?"
"I managed to take a hematological scan. The level of crystal infecting his bloodstream is rising. I also detected traces of it in his internal organs." He
gestured toward a portable dialysis machine. "We have attempted to use the filtering treatment that you described to me. It had almost no effect."
I checked the machine, and in the reservoir saw blackened pieces of heartwood. "You used heartwood charcoal?" The medical officer nodded. "That is
where you went wrong. Most of the resin is burned out. Have someone refit the unit with seasoned, unburned wood." I tried to open the door to the
treatment room, but it was secured by pass code. "What is the entry code?"
After giving the commander a worried glance, the medical officer told me the code, and I went inside.
"Healer Jarn," Jylyj said from behind the curtain. He sounded relieved, but when I reached for the curtain, he added, "No, leave it closed. Tell the others
to leave, and then come around."
I turned to Reever, who nodded and spoke to the commander. "I would like to see the other members of our team and arrange to contact the one who
remains on the surface."
After the men had left, I walked around and entered the gap in the curtain. Instantly, I saw why Jylyj had not wanted the others to see him; small spots of
crystal glittered in his darkening fur, and the shape of his face had also altered. His once-dark eyes, now a light green, had tiny cataracts of crystal
occluding the irises.
"Initiate sterile field," Jylyj said, and a bioelectric curtain formed around us. To me, he said, "This will keep them from overhearing us."
"Just so." I found a container of gloves and pulled on a pair before I went to him. "Either the crystal wishes you to be an oKiaf when it kills you, or you
lied to me. Which is it?"
He glanced down at himself. "I told you as much of the truth as I could. Genetically I am Skartesh, or at least I was until an hour ago. My body is reverting
to my natal form."
"You were born oKiaf, but you were alterformed into a Skartesh." As he nodded, I used a scanner to detect the level of crystal infection, which was
indeed rising, before I checked the occlusions in his eyes. "The League scientists didn't do this. Their technology is not this advanced."
"After the initial alterforming, my body did it on its own," Jylyj told me. "My immune system must have responded to the changes made to my DNA.
Within a few hours, all of my oKiaf genes were gone, replaced by Skartesh."

"This reversion could be a good sign. Excuse me for a moment. Deactivate sterile field." As the bioelectric field vanished, I went to leave.
"Reinitiate sterile field." Jylyj seized my arm. "You can't tell them. I have already violated tribal law. If they learn of who I was"--he shook his head--"it
could be very bad for the rest of you."
"Why?" Now I felt utterly confused. "Who are you?"
"I was a major in the Allied League intelligence forces," Jylyj said. "I was originally alterformed to infiltrate the Skartesh when they fled to K-2," Jylyj said.
"My real name is Shon Valtas."
I frowned. "Then these are your people. Your tribe."
"Not since I enlisted," he told me. "My father forbade it, and when I defied him, he cast me out of the tribe. It's the same as being dead to them, and as
an outcast, I could never return here."
"But you did." My head hurt. "What laws did you break, and how much trouble are you in?"
"Outcasts are shunned by the tribes and driven from the planet," he said slowly. "If they ever return to oKia and are discovered, they're handed over to
Elphian for punishment. As is anyone who helps them."
"What is the punishment?"
"Enslavement, or imprisonment for life." He sighed. "Forgive me."
"Oh, now you're sorry." I thought fast. "We can probably keep them from finding out who you are for a little while, but we really have to get you out of
here."
"In a few hours, it won't matter," he said. "I regret that I didn't tell you the truth. I only wanted to die on my homeworld."
"You did jump in that pit of crystal deliberately." I stared at him. "That's why you kept telling me afterward to let you go. You were trying to kill yourself."
"The League has been hunting me ever since they discovered that I was a touch healer. I changed my appearance, assumed the identity of a dead
Skartesh medical resident, and even hid myself on Joren. But I knew they would never stop looking, and I grew tired of running." He lay back on the table
and stared into the emitter hanging over it. "My father was like me, although not as strong. He said the crystal was one of the few things that could kill us.
After I lost Jadaira . . . I only wanted it to end."
I felt like slapping him. "I don't know who Jadaira is, but you're a healer with a tremendous gift. You could use it to help so many, but instead you decide
to commit suicide. That isn't as stupid as it is obscene."
He propped himself up on his arms. "Do you know what the League wanted me to do? What oKiaf touch healers have always done for them? We're
used in interrogation centers. Prisoners are beaten and abused to the brink of death, and then we're brought in to heal them, so they can be tortured
again. And again. And again."
My stomach clenched. "You could have refused to do it."
"You don't refuse the League. You know what they're capable of." He gave me a weary look. "They murdered my little brother. They drowned him after
my father refused to serve as their chief interrogator."
Little wonder the father had made Jylyj--Shon--an outcast for joining them. "But they didn't know about you or your abilities, or they would never have
discharged you from the military."
He shook his head. "I concealed what I was from them for years, until one of the aquatic pilots on K-2 fatally injured herself while saving the Skartesh. I
found her dying, and because I cared for her, I couldn't let her go. After I used my ability a second time to save the young leader of a neighboring world,
word got back to the League, and they came for me. And I wasn't discharged from the military, Jarn. I deserted."
"You did what was necessary." I didn't care if he was a criminal. He had destroyed his life in order to remain true to his oath as a healer and do the
work. In my eyes, it had been a noble act. "It must have taken great courage. You have no reason to feel shame."
His voice turned bitter. "I will if the League captures me and forces me to use my ability on their prisoners."
"The League is not here, and you are not giving yourself to the oKiaf, either." I jabbed my finger into his chest. "You are going to fight this infection, and
give me time to find a treatment for it. You are going to live, Major Valtas."
"Why should I?"
Anger surged inside me."In all the years Cherijo Grey Veil was hunted for what she was--for what I am--she never gave up healing. It is why we were
made, and to deny it or run away from it or to kill yourself rather than face it is the act of a sniveling coward. I am many things, but I am not that, and
whatever happens to me, I will not be remembered that way." I gave him a look of contempt. "Is this how you wish to be remembered?"
"My father is dead. My tribe would have me imprisoned or sold to slavers." He closed his eyes. "There is no one left who cares."
"There is me, and Duncan. There are others like you and me. They are the brothers and sisters of our hearts." I took his paw between my hands. "We
will be your tribe now."
He made a rough sound. "You don't even like me."
"Then give me a reason to. Live. Be my brother." I gripped his paw as the tears in my eyes spilled over. "Shon, please. I have never met anyone like me.
I can't tell you why, but I know, in here"--I pressed his paw to my heart--"we need you."
Some of the pain left his gaze, and then he looked away. "This is a useless conversation. I will not survive the infection."
"You let me worry about that." I draped him with linens and quickly wrapped most of his face and head with gauze. "I need to put you back on dialysis
until we can arrange transport off oKia. I will tell them that the crystal is suppurating through your skin and you have to be kept under quarantine."
He glanced at his arms. "Crystal is coming out of my skin."
"You see? I will not even have to lie," I said. "The risk of exposure should keep them out of here." I turned toward the room's control console. "Deactivate
sterile field."
I went out of the isolation room and into the corridor. A technician had just finished replacing the charcoal in the filtering reservoir with fresh wood
shavings.
"The patient has crystal erupting through his derma," I told the technician, whose eyes bulged. "Anyone who enters this room risks exposure and
infection, so I am placing it under strict quarantine. No one enters without first obtaining my permission. Show me how to change the security code on this
door panel."
Once I changed the access code, I wheeled the unit into the isolation room, secured the door, and started the treatment.
"What do you think of me now, Healer?" he asked.
"I am glad to know that your name is not Jylyj," I mentioned as I monitored the level of crystal in his blood. "I never liked it much. It doesn't suit you at all."
"It was that or Hurkuut."
I grimaced. "That sounds like someone regurgitating."
"So I thought, but the Skartesh language is not known for its lyrical qualities." He watched the scanner with me. "You did see me coming out of the water
that morning on Joren. I couldn't risk exposing myself by telling you the truth."
"I knew it." I frowned. "But how did you learn to swim? As a Skartesh, you should have gone into shock from being immersed."
"I did not acquire the Skartesh's biological aversion to water." His voice changed. "Ever since my brother drowned, I'd hated it, and feared it. Then I met
Jadaira on K-2, and she was an aquatic. To be with her, I had to learn to swim."

I had no great love of water, and silently gave thanks that Reever had not turned out to be an aquatic. "How did that go?"
"Awkward at first. Dair coaxed me into a little pond, and I thought I'd choke to death on my fear. But she was patient with me, and gradually I learned to
tolerate it, and then to relax in it, and finally to love it, as I loved her."
The thought of an oKiaf falling in love with an aquatic should have seemed bizarre, but I found it both charming and sad. "You said you lost her. Did she
die in the war?"
"No, I lost her to another male." He grimaced. "She gave her heart to one of her own kind. They are far more happy together than she and I would have
been."
"That doesn't make it any easier to accept." I thought of all the jealousy I had felt toward Cherijo for being Reever's first wife. "If you are in love with this
aquatic, why have you shown such interest in me?"
"I don't know," he admitted. "It was your scent at first--you may not be beautiful by oKiaf standards, but you smell like the loveliest of females. And then
you touched me, and I swear to you, I felt it in my soul. It was as if I recognized you, here." He tapped his chest. "I didn't know how complete your bond was
with your mate. I guess on some level I wanted to test it."
"Duncan and I . . ." How did I explain the complexity of our relationship? "We belong to each other. There will never be another for me, or for him."
"I never wished to admit it, but I felt the same for Jadaira. It was never meant to be, however." He looked over at the dialysis unit. "This will stabilize the
infection rate, but that is all it will do. We have never found any method of removing the crystal once it has infiltrated a living body."
I was slightly relieved by the change of subject. "It mutates like a virus, spreads like cancer, eats like bacteria. I have never seen any pathogen like it. Yet
its composition is mineral--almost identical to that of common quartz."
"Perhaps it is a silica-based life-form." He seemed amused. "If it is, will you name it after me?"
"Shon's planet-eating rock?" I suggested.
"Valtas crystal," he corrected. "It sounds more dignified."
Someone chimed the door panel, and I handed the scanner to Shon before I went to see who it was. Reever and the commander stood waiting in the
corridor, and neither looked happy.
"I'll return in a moment," I told him, and stepped outside. To Reever, I said, "I've started Sh--Jylyj back on dialysis. His readings are stabilizing, but the
infection has advanced. Were you able to signal Xonea?"
My husband shook his head. "We have been unable to reach the ship at all. The station has been overtaken by mercenaries. They are holding the
Elphian hostage and have demanded an exchange. The Valtas have agreed to their terms."
I turned to the commander. "You can't trade my husband and me like we are only commodities. There must be another way to rescue your people."
"The mercenaries did not ask for either of you," the commander said. "They want the Skartesh."

Sixteen
"It is a good trade," the commander insisted. He couldn't quite look me in the eye. "The Skartesh is near death, and nothing can save him."
"Forgive me," I said, "but when did you become a physician? Before or after your military training?"
The oKiaf gave me a sour look. "What I mean to say is, he will not live long enough to be used by them or suffer at their hands."
My astonishment over the fact that the mercenaries had not come for me and Reever became lost in the disgust I felt for this man. "As opposed to be
used and made to suffer by you." I nodded. "I thought you were a stupid man. Now I am sure of it."
The commander glanced at my husband. "I cannot sacrifice hundreds to spare one who will not live. We are launching in thirty minutes." He inclined his
head toward me before he walked away.
"They're not taking him." I turned around and unlocked the door panel. "I won't permit it."
"We may have no choice in the matter." Reever followed me into the isolation room and watched me secure the panel. "Jarn, you can't barricade
yourself in here with Jylyj. The Valtas will simply blast their way in."
"You don't understand," I said very patiently.
"We don't have time to smuggle the Skartesh out of the building, much less the city," my husband said as he examined the room, "but we may be able
to hide him. Is there a gurney we can use to move him?"
"You don't understand." I dragged him around the curtain. "I don't have a Skartesh in here anymore. Duncan, meet Major Shon Valtas."
"Where is . . . Jylyj?" He took a step closer to the table. "Jarn, what have you done to him?"
"Why does he always assume that I have done it?" I demanded of the ceiling.
"This is my true appearance. I am oKiaf. The crystal has reversed the alterforming that made me Skartesh." Shon sat up. "What has happened?"
Reever told him about the attack on the station, and the commander's stupid decision.
Shon swung his legs over the side of the table. "Disconnect the unit, healer."
"You are not going along with this." I stopped him from removing his IV. "Say you go and you do die on board the mercenaries' ship. What do you think
they will do with your body? Eject it into the nearest star?"
"No. My body has to be destroyed. The oKiaf have some powerful ordnance. Most of it is pulse weaponry and too large for our needs, but there will be
a selection of thermal fusion grenades stocked for the infantry." He regarded me steadily. "You must implant one in my body."
I backed away from him. "No."
He continued as if I hadn't spoken. "When I am on board and safely away from the station, I will detonate the grenade."
"I am not making you into a bomb," I shouted.
"Then the League will pay the mercenaries for my body, harvest my DNA, and use it to create an army of soldiers with my abilities." He stood, bracing
himself for a moment. "I cannot allow them to do that."
An alarm sounded, and Reever went to the panel to check the corridor. Medical staff ran in both directions. An oKiaf began speaking over the com.
"A dozen ships have assumed orbit and are firing on the surface settlements," Shon said, translating for me. "The Valtas are evacuating all of the tribes
above into the underground cities."
Outside, the commander appeared with a unit of armed soldiers, and demanded entry.
Shon went to the wall panel, and before I could stop him, spoke to the commander. "You are as impatient as ever, Dagar."
The commander stared at the viewer. "Shon? What are you doing in there? Where is . . ." he stopped as he put it all together. "You are the Skartesh?
How can this be?"
"Give us a moment, if you would." He lifted his paw to switch off the com, and stared at his crystal-streaked claws. "Reever, can you convince Captain
Torin to pursue the ship that takes me?"
"If the mercenaries have not taken over the Sunlace, and I explain the circumstances," my husband said, "I believe I can."
"The captain cannot take half measures," Shon said. "The ship I am on must be destroyed."
"No." Everything inside me reacted violently to the thought of Shon sacrificing himself. "We can signal Joren, and hold them off until the HouseClan
ships arrive. I was a member of the Ruling Council. They will listen to me."
"There is more to protect here than just Shon's life," Reever told me. "The League cannot be allowed to discover the crystal on oKia."
"To hell with the damned crystal." I saw from their expressions that they had no intentions of listening to me. "I will not be a part of this."
I opened the door panel and strode out into the corridor, nearly walking into the commander. "If you hand Shon over to the mercenaries, they will find out
about the crystal. They will tell the League. You cannot do it."
"Now that they know I am on oKia," Shon said from behind me, "they will send every available ship they have in this region, and hire more. I cannot stay.
I am a qualified fighter pilot. Give me a strafer, cousin, and I will draw them away before I fly it into the sun."
"There is no guarantee they will believe you are the one for whom they came," Dagar said, and then turned to Reever. "We have made contact with your
vessel," he told my husband. "They intend to engage the mercenaries. I am sending our surface patrols up to assist. They should hold them off long
enough to get a launch down to the surface."
"One of our team escaped the mercenary attack," Reever said. "An avatar. He is still on the surface."
The commander shook his head. "We found him and brought him down from the surface. He is with the Jorenian and the Takgiba."
"We are taking Shon with us," I said. Before the men could respond, I added, "They know he was part of our expedition. Xonea can transition out of this
system and take us back to Joren. Then if they want a fight, they can face the HouseClan fleet."
"Why would Joren protect one of us?" Dagar asked.
"Because Dnoc was wrong about me, Commander," I told him. "I am not the crystal healer. Your cousin is."
I expected more arguments, but for once the men listened to me and agreed to the plan. I quickly rigged a portable version of the dialysis unit that Shon
could carry on his back, and took as much heartwood pulp as I could fit into my case.
We met Qonja, Hawk, and Uorwlan at the launch bay, where one of the Sunlace's shuttles had just landed. The Takgiba's black and white fur appeared
patchy, and there were some deep scratches on Qonja's arms, but she seemed calm now.
"I'm ready to see this place from the display of a remote scanner," she told Reever. "Let's jaunt out of here."
"There is not enough room for all of us," Qonja said. "Hawk and I will fly on one of the oKiaf shuttles."
Shon stayed behind to speak to the commander alone, and when he walked up the boarding ramp, he looked a little dazed.
"Come and sit down." I followed him and checked the lines connected to the unit in his pack before I scanned him. "What is it? Are you feeling weaker?
"

"No, I am well." He removed the pack carefully, handing it to me before he sat down. "It seems my father lied to me. According to Dagar, he did not carry
out his threat. I was never cast out of the tribe."
"Is that good news," I asked, "or bad?"
"It is confusing," he admitted. "My father made it very clear what my punishment would be if I joined the League. My defiance enraged him. He never
responded to any of the signals I sent after I left oKia." He ducked his head. "I don't understand. My father did not make idle threats, and he had every
reason to cast me out."
"Perhaps he found a reason to forgive you," I suggested as I fastened the flight harness over him. "It would be fitting for you to do the same."
He met my gaze. "My name has not been rubbed away from the tribe's naming hide. The hunters still call out my name during the winter count. My
stories are still told around the fires." This seemed to astound him. "I have never been forgotten."
I smiled. "So now you have two tribes."
The Jorenian pilot said little to us, and took off as soon as the oKiaf gave him clearance. From the viewports we saw oKiaf strafers patrolling the upper
atmosphere, and debris from what appeared to have been a ferocious fight, but no mercenary ships appeared or tried to attack us.
"They must have been no match for the Sunlace," I said as we entered the blackness of space and approached the Jorenian vessel.
"More likely they retreated to call for reinforcements," my husband said, looking grim.
Once we were back on board, we were summoned to the command center to meet with Xonea.
I needed to take Shon to medical, but I wanted to make sure no more bargains were made in my absence. I also thought Xonea should see for himself
what the crystal was doing to Shon's body.
"I have to signal my ship," Uorwlan said. "If I still have one."
Qonja and Hawk offered to escort her to the communications center, and the three went off together.
"We should do this briefing quickly," I told Duncan as we headed for the command center. "Knowing my ClanBrother's temper, I would leave out the part
about the oKiaf holding us prisoner."
In one way it was a relief to be back on the ship, and in another it made me feel as if I were back in the locked chamber in the underground city. Already
I missed the fresh cold air of the planet, the colors of the trees, and the feel of the ground beneath my feet. Compared to oKia, the Sunlace now seemed
sterile and lifeless.
"How did you escape the takeover at the station?" Reever asked the shuttle pilot, who was following us to the command center.
The Jorenian checked his wristcom, muttered something, and abruptly changed direction, disappearing down an adjacent corridor.
I had never seen a member of the crew behave so rudely. Then I thought of how vengeful Cherijo's adopted people could be. "Do you think Xonea and
the crew are angry with us for keeping them from chasing after the mercenaries who survived the battle?"
"I don't know, but something is wrong," Reever said.
My ClanBrother had assembled all of his department chiefs in the command center for the briefing, and none of the Jorenians looked particularly happy
to see us. After offering a terse gesture of greeting, the captain asked Reever to report on what had occurred on-planet.
As my husband related our experiences, I turned my attention to Shon.
"Dagar said that when the crystal completely solidifies over the surface of a planet, it cannot convert back to its liquid phase," I said. "How does he
know what it does?"
"Our scientists conducted many tests on the crystal," Shon said. "They found that once the crystal solidifies completely around any living object, it alters
the composition so that it cannot change back. Not even Cu2Au can change it back to its liquid phase."
I could deal with that. "So once crystal has hardened on the outside of your body, it should not be able to turn liquid again and retreat back into your
bloodstream and organs."
"In theory, no." He gave me an uncertain look. "What are you thinking of doing?"
"If I can somehow force the crystal to emerge onto your skin and solidify, and I determine how to cut through it, I can surgically remove it." I saw his eyes.
"Before you suffocate."
"Is there something you wish to contribute to the discussion, Healer?" Xonea said.
So we were back to calling each other Healer and Captain. "No." I looked at my ClanBrother's impassive features, and felt a little guilty for ignoring the
ongoing briefing. "Major Valtas and I were discussing his condition. I will wait until this is over to continue."
"Major, you have considerable knowledge of the oKiaf defense capabilities on the planet, do you not?" Xonea asked abruptly.
"It has been some time since I have lived here," Shon admitted. "All I know is what we saw while underground, but it appears to be considerable. I think
the oKiaf will be able to easily repel any future attacks by the mercenaries."
For a moment Xonea almost looked disappointed. "We intercepted a signal from a League vessel that indicated oKia as its destination. Have your
people allied themselves with the League again?"
"No, Captain, they have not, and I can assure you, they have no interest in rejoining the League." Shon gestured toward the viewport. "If they come to
oKia, they will be treated like any other invader."
"I am glad to hear it. The League has meddled enough in our plans." Xonea turned to Reever. "When you could not raise the ship, did you attempt to
contact Joren?"
"Our transceiver was damaged, and then there wasn't time." My husband leaned forward. "I assume you did."
"I saw no reason for it. We were able to defend the ship adequately." Xonea rose to his feet. "Very well, I think we have covered all the pertinent issues
for now. We will transition in a few minutes." He turned to gaze at Shon. "Major Valtas, the oKiaf authorities have signaled and expressed a wish to speak
with you privately. If you wish to respond, you should do so now."
Shon rose to his feet and headed for the communications center.
"I need you back in medical as soon as you're through," I called after him. To Xonea, I said, "Are there any wounded?"
"Some of the crew sustained minor injuries, but the medical staff treated them." My ClanBrother didn't seem concerned as he dismissed his officers.
"You should go to your quarters and rest while you can, Healer."
"I have to see to Shon and the wounded first." I turned to Reever. "You should check on the crystal in the survey lab." As distracted as we had been with
the oKiaf and their killer crystal, I'd given little thought to the specimen we'd left behind on the Sunlace.
Reever touched my arm. "Signal me as soon as you get to medical, and let me know about the wounded."
"Why?"
He glanced past me. "Something is not right. I cannot say what it is, but Xonea is not acting like himself. I don't like the way the rest of the Jorenians
were looking at us, either. All I sense from them and Xonea is hostility."
"That is usually the mind-set of the warrior fresh from battle." I sighed. "I know what you mean. I feel it, too. Once we're back on Joren and surrounded by
the HouseClan fleet, I'm sure everyone's spirits will improve."
I took the nearest lift to medical bay and mentally went over what I would need to continue the filtering treatments to keep Shon alive while I searched for
a cure. As I walked into the bay, I expected to see most of the berths filled and the staff busy attending to them. The echo of my footsteps rang against my

ears as I surveyed the emptiness.
Every berth had been made up perfectly. Equipment trays stood neatly arranged and waiting to be used. The floor itself glowed, as spotless as if it were
brand-new. I knew in my absence Herea would have taken her responsibilities very seriously, but in the wake of the battle, there should have been some
disorder.
"Herea? Charge Nurse?" I called out, walking around the unoccupied bay. I found everything in its place, but no one on duty. Frowning, I went to a com
panel and signaled Command. "Xonea? No one is here in medical. Did Herea set up a temporary triage in one of the cargo bays?"
The panel must have been malfunctioning, or the captain was ignoring me, for no one responded.
"Fine, ClanBrother. I will go and find it myself." I walked out and down the corridor to the survey lab. The panel was no longer secured, and I opened it to
find another empty room--this one stripped of all the special equipment Nalek Kalea had installed. The black crystal was also gone.
"Reever?" I started to cross the threshold, and then stepped back. The door panel closed in my face.
A terrible bleakness washed over me as I hurried to another com panel in the corridor and attempted to signal command. When I received no
response, I tried a second panel, and then a third, and sent signals to command, communications, engineering, and the galley. No one on the ship
responded to my signals.
That was when I became aware of the emptiness around me. The ship was about to transition; the corridors should have been bustling with crew
members preparing for the interdimensional jump. The passages were instead completely deserted. In fact, since leaving command, I had not seen a
single member of the crew. It was as if I were the only one left on board.
I ran to our quarters and found them empty. With shaking hands I filled a server with water and drank it to ease my tight throat. Sweat had dampened the
native garments I still wore, and I decided to change before I went back to command and demanded some answers from my ClanBrother.
As I went to retrieve fresh garments from the storage units in our bed chamber, I saw Jenner and Juliet sleeping on the end of our berth. I went to scratch
Jenner's head as he looked at me with his big blue eyes, and then froze as I remembered.
We had left the cats back on Joren.
"No." I reached down to seize the cat by the throat, and my hand passed through the image of it, causing a brief static disruption of the holographic
image.
I ran to the com panel and initiated a ship-wide signal. "Reever, if you can hear me, respond." I waited a few seconds and tried again. "Duncan, this is
an emergency, please respond now."
Reever didn't reply to my signal. Neither did anyone else. When I attempted to leave our quarters, the door panel refused to open.
I went to the storage units where I kept my garments and weapons and found them empty. The furnishings turned out to be more holographic images.
The only thing the prep unit would produce was water. I searched frantically, but found nothing I could use to defend myself.
Through the viewport I saw the dwindling image of oKia, and rested my brow against the plas.
"Duncan," I whispered. "What have we done?"
"The door panel opened behind me. "Your husband is here, Dr. Grey Veil."
I whirled around to see a short-statured, dark-haired Terran and two mercenaries holding Duncan and Shon, who were bound and gagged. The Terran
held a device in his hand, and when he pressed a switch on it the image of our quarters on the Sunlace vanished, replaced by another, unfamiliar
chamber.
"This is a secured cell," the Terran said to me. "You will be kept here during our sojourn. Follow instructions, and you will be treated fairly."
I knew him now, and the sight of him horrified me.
Reever suddenly broke free of his bonds and shoved one mercenary into the other. As he bent down to grab the rifle the mercenary had dropped, the
Terran produced a pulse pistol, turned, and shot my husband in the right arm and both legs. I screamed as Reever went down and blood spurted from the
massive wounds in his limbs.
I ran, uncaring of the pistol the Terran pointed at me, and knelt in a pool of Reever's blood.
"Duncan." I tried to staunch the flow with my hands, and then Shon was there, cut free of his bonds. He gently moved my hands aside and rested his
paws over my husband's leg wounds.
Light poured out of the edges of Shon's tunic as he closed his eyes and his expression turned to one of great concentration. When he lifted one paw to
place it over Reever's arm wound, I saw the terrible gaping hole in my husband's thigh had disappeared.
I looked up at the Terran, who was smiling.
"We had to be sure we had the touch healer," he told me as he tucked the pistol in his belt and walked out.
Shon opened his eyes and sagged back against the wall of the cell. "He will be all right."
"Where are we?" I asked. "Whose ship is this?"
"I don't know." He was breathing heavily now. "But this is not a League ship."
More mercenaries came into the room and dragged me to my feet. When I fought them, one hit me over the back of the head with his weapon, and I lost
consciousness.
I came to in a different place, my body sprawled on a deck. Beyond me, a long row of observation panels showed a vast expanse of stars and
blackness. The Terran who had shot Duncan stood looking out, but when I propped myself up, he turned around.
"You are awake. Good. It's time we talked."
Joseph Grey Veil began walking toward me.

Seventeen
I knew that he was Joseph Grey Veil. I recognized him from a few pictures that I had found among Cherijo's possessions. His features also told me who
he was. Looking upon him was like gazing into a distorted mirror.
I also knew that Joseph Grey was dead, murdered on Terra by Cherijo's brother.
No. Something shriveled inside me, cold and shuddering. It can't be him.
"It's been such a long time, my dear." The Terran came to stand over me, and offered a hand to help me up.

Don't let him touch me.
I crawled backward away from it and stood, reaching for the blade I had tucked beneath my belt.
"The guards took the knife," Joseph said. "You should not have fought them. They wouldn't have hurt you if you had obeyed my orders."
Who is he? "Who are you?"
"They said you had experienced memory loss due to a head injury." He studied my face. "I am Joseph Grey Veil." He waited for me to say something,
and took a step toward me. "I am your father, Cherijo."

I have no father. I was made, not born.
I backed away. "Joseph Grey Veil died on Terra years ago." My shoulders hit the wall behind me. "Who are you?"
"You still believe that your brother Jericho killed me. Small wonder, then, that you look so frightened." He smiled at me. "That man who died was a clone,
like you. He was, in fact, the oldest of your cloned brothers. In dangerous situations I often used him as a double. I was quite put out when Jericho
murdered him."

He's lying. Look into his eyes. I can see it.
My head throbbed and I felt as if I might puke. "I don't believe you."
"Of course you don't. You are in shock," he advised me. "In time, you will come to accept that I am alive, and we will be together from now on."
No. No. NO.
Fear crawled all over me, inside and out, and all I could think was that I had to get as far away from this man as I could. "Why did you abduct us? What
do you want?"
"You are my daughter, Cherijo. In fact, legally you are still my property. I am simply recovering what belongs to me." He went to a prep unit and dialed up
a server of tea. "You haven't stopped drinking chamomile, I hope."

Run.
I ran to the door panel and tried to open it. He had secured it. "I want to go back to my husband."
"Duncan Reever is not your husband. You are not classified as a sentient being, so you cannot marry." He filled a clear server with a light amber liquid.
"You will need it to be sweet for the shock. Do you prefer sugar or honey?"

He'll use it to cover up the taste of the drugs. Don't drink it.
Sweat stung my eyes as it streamed down my face. If I could have crawled up the wall to get away from him, I would have. "Take me back to Duncan."
"I think honey is more soothing." He stirred something into the server and brought it to me. "Here. Drink. It will calm your nerves."

Throw it in his face. Blind him.
I couldn't bring myself to do that, so I slapped the server out of his hand. "Get away from me."
"Why are you so afraid?" Something gleamed in his eyes. "I created you. I raised you. You have known me most of your life. I never harmed you, did I?"
He is not my father.
I turned and pounded on the door panel, shouting for someone to help me. When I felt a cold hand settle on the back of my neck, dread made me
freeze.

Oh God oh God no please don't-The voice inside my head abruptly went silent.
"That's better." Still holding my neck, he turned me around to face him. "I am sorry I did not come for you before now. By killing my double, your brother
caused a great deal of trouble for me, and then I was blamed for the war between the League and the Hsktskt. Fortunately, I had some colleagues in the
research field who knew better and helped me go into hiding. In all the years that we have been kept apart, I never stopped thinking about you, Daughter. I
came to find you as soon as I could."
Uorwlan had warned us about the one sending the mercenaries after us . . . a wealthy Terran with friends among the League.
"You are the one who put the bounty on me and Duncan." I wanted to shout it, but the only thing that would come from my throat was a thin whisper.
Sweat now soaked my garments, and I trembled all over.
"I could not personally search the entire galaxy for you," he explained as he steered me over to the observation viewer. "Offering the bounty was the
quickest and surest method of finding you."

My father would never trust mercenaries with me. He despised offworlders.
Some of the inexplicable fear drained out of me. "Are you taking me back to Terra?"
He laughed. "No, I'm afraid we wouldn't be very welcome on the homeworld." He released his grip on me. "I can't discuss my plans with you just yet.
Later, when you are thinking more rationally, perhaps I will."
I still felt enough terror squeezing my insides to make my voice shake. "Then take me back to my--to Duncan."
"In a little while," he said. "First, I would like you to tell me where Marel is."

God, he knows.
"Marel?" Surely this was the worst of my nightmares. "I don't know that name."
"You should. You and her father picked it out together." He chuckled, as if it were all a jest. "Cherijo, did you really think you could hide her from me? I
have been waiting for years for you to make me a grandfather."
I would kill myself before I acknowledged my child's existence. "If you are referring to the one pregnancy I had before you abducted me the last time, I
miscarried the fetus. You confirmed that yourself when you examined me on Terra."
"I know your immune system wouldn't allow you to carry a child full-term, as I designed it that way," he agreed. "But recently, the Omorr have made great
strides toward the creation of an artificial womb to sustain premature infants delivered in the first trimester. The bulk of the research and design of the
chamber was done by an Omorr surgeon. The same one, as it happens, who attended you during your miscarriage."
I said nothing.
"Tell me where she is, Cherijo, and I will see to it that you're reunited with her as soon as she can be retrieved. She belongs with us." He tried to touch

my face, but I jerked out of reach. "If you don't tell me, you'll never see her again."
"There is no child," I insisted. "I lost my baby. The Jorenians will give you the medical records to prove it."
"Of course." He sounded thoughtful. "The Jorenians would do anything to protect you, wouldn't they? Part of the problem in finding you was always
getting past them. I want to show you something."
When I made no move to follow him, he took me by the arm and hauled me across the deck to a vid panel set into the wall.
"I took great interest in the Hsktskt who was alterformed into a Jorenian," he said as he switched on the screen. "Jorenians, like the Hsktskt, refuse to
live as slaves, and to attempt to abduct one is to sign one's own death warrant. Acquiring samples of their DNA, however, only involves briefly interrupting
one of their funerary probes on its flight into their star. I believe that is how the Hsktskt acquired what they used to create PyrsVar."
I saw the image of a young Jorenian male in an empty isolation chamber. He appeared frightened, and moved restlessly around the room.
"I commissioned the alterforming of this slave-born crossbreed to serve as a subject for my viral research," he said, indicating the image. "It took some
months, but with my help the geneticists were able to alter his DNA and his body to make him approximately ninety percent pure Jorenian."
A drone arm extended from the ceiling of the chamber and jabbed a syrinpress into the neck of the young male. I flinched exactly as he did in the
image.
"Using what I learned from studying this male's physiology, I engineered a virus," Joseph said. "He has just been injected with it." He tapped some of
the screen controls. "Now I'll increase the speed of the replay so you can observe the full effects quickly. This will cover twenty-four hours in a few
seconds."
The actions of the isolated male began to speed up. He clutched at his belly, began to sweat, vomited, fell several times, and then collapsed. His mouth
opened again and again as he apparently called for help. His movements became slower, and he fell, unconscious, and stopped breathing.
The young male's face blurred momentarily, and I blinked the tears from my eyes.
"No need to be upset, my dear. He was bred in a slave pen. Granted, dying in this manner was quite painful, but really nothing compared to the lifetime
of misery he would have experienced as a slave." Joseph switched off the image. "The virus attacks either through the bloodstream or the respiratory
system, depending on how it is delivered. But the truth of it is that it only kills Jorenians."
His self-satisfied babbling finally penetrated my wretched sorrow. "You were a doctor once. You took an oath to do no harm to any other sentient being.
How could you do such a thing?"
"I had planned to disperse the virus on Joren in order to find you," he admitted, as if it were something of little consequence. "Until now I had thought
that would no longer be necessary."
I stared at him. "You are a monster."
"I will have what belongs to me, Cherijo." He used the com panel. "Captain, please set course for Joren."
"You have me," I said.
"I want Marel," he told me. "Tell me where she is, and I will destroy the virus as soon as she joins us."
"There is no Marel," I said, desperately clinging to my lie. "You would be murdering millions of people for one child who exists only in your imagination."
"She is as real as you, Daughter," he said. "As for the Jorenians, their fate is in your hands now. You will decide which is more important to you: your
daughter or an entire civilization." He turned as two guards entered the room. "Take her back to the cell."
"You can't do this," I shouted as the guards seized my arms. "I will do whatever you want. I will go willingly with you anywhere."
"You are going with me to Joren," Joseph told me. "If you do not tell me what I want to know, you will also watch everyone on the planet die."
I didn't see where the guards took me. The face of the dead alterformed slave seemed imprinted on my eyes. When I blinked, it changed to that of
Jorenians I knew: Salo, Darea, Xonal, young Fasala. I told myself over and over that even a sadistic brute like Joseph Grey Veil would not dare
exterminate a species merely to get his way. Then I remembered what Reever had told me of him, and what I read in Cherijo's journals. In his efforts to
retrieve Cherijo, Joseph Grey Veil had set into motion the war between the League and the Hsktskt. Worlds had been devastated, millions wounded and
killed--all because of this one man and what he desired.
I saw myself taking one of the rifles from the guards and firing it into my mouth. The pulse would vaporize my head and most of my upper torso; surely
enough to kill me. I would happily die to protect Marel and Joren. But would that even stop him? If he suspected Marel was on Joren, my death would not
prevent him from releasing the virus. It removed every obstacle that would otherwise keep him from searching the planet for Marel, and he knew it would
not kill my daughter.
The guards stopped outside the room that had been made to look like our quarters on the Sunlace, and one of them checked the interior on the outside
door panel. It showed Reever and Shon still lying bound, gagged, and unconscious on the deck. Only then did the guard input the entry code and march
me inside.
What happened then was fast and violent. Blood splashed over me as a blade whipped across the throat of one guard. Claws blinded the second, who
choked on his scream as his head was wrenched too far to one side and his neck snapped.
Reever dragged the dead guard inside and reached with a bloody hand to close the door panel.
"You were on the floor," I said stupidly. "I saw you."
"We made a recycling image of ourselves as we were before we got out of our bonds, and programmed the panel from the inside to display it." He
pulled me into his arms. "Did he harm you?"
In ways I could never describe , I thought. "Not yet." I held on to him for a few precious seconds before I pulled away and turned to Shon. Streaks of
crystal ran diagonally across his face and encased his right forearm. I knew from the sorrow in his eyes what it had cost him to kill the guard. "Thank you."
"You can thank me, too," Uorwlan said as she came out of the adjoining room. She handed rifles to Shon and Reever, and offered one to me.
I took it and slung it over my shoulder. "How did you free yourself?"
"Remember what I told you about males?" She smiled, showing bloodied teeth. "There's one guard who won't be spreading it around anymore."
Shon began stripping the guard out of his uniform. "Rinse the blood from the other's tunic. It is dark enough that no one will notice it is wet."
As I helped Reever removed the other guard's uniform, I told him about the clone Joseph Grey Veil had used on Terra, how he had gone into hiding to
conceal his identity during the war, and why he had offered the bounty for us.
"That man cannot be Joseph," my husband said flatly. "I saw his dead body on Terra. It was not that of a clone."
I wanted to believe him, but I had felt such an instinctive fear of the man that doubt filled me. "If he used a clone, he would look the same."
"Cherijo once stabbed Joseph in the hand. It left a small but distinctive scar. The man Jericho killed had the same scar." He glanced at my face.
"Something else happened."
I told him of the Terran's demands and his promise to release the bioengineered virus as soon as we reached Joren if I did not tell him where our
daughter was.
Reever stripped out of his garments and dressed in the guard's wet tunic. "If he has this virus on board, then all we have to do is destroy the ship."
"First we have to get off," Uorwlan pointed out. "Which we should do--now."
"We will go directly to launch bay," my husband decided. "As soon as we can find it."

"I am certain this ship has the same number of decks, quarters, and bays in the same places as the real Sunlace ," I said. "I think it was built to be a
duplicate."
"Why use all the holoprojectors, then?" Uorwlan asked. "Why not fit it out like the real thing?"
"They didn't have enough time," Reever said. "One of the guards was complaining about it. From what I overheard, this ship was removed from the
construction docks before it was finished. The crew was not supposed to report for duty for another six months."
"The Terran said he had intended to use the virus to find me on Joren," I said. "He must have commissioned the HouseClan ship as part of that plan."
"He would have been able to assume orbit around Joren without arousing suspicions." Shon pulled the guard's headgear down over his face, and to
cover the rifle draped my shoulders with the native garment he had removed. "Remember to hold your hands behind your back so they appear to be
bound."
To anyone watching us leave the cell, we appeared to be two prisoners being moved by two guards. The ruse worked so well that we passed two
crewmen who barely gave us a glance.
We entered the lift that would take us to launch bay, and as soon as it closed us in, I turned to my husband. "We can't return to the station or the planet.
Where will we go?"
"My ship," Uorwlan said. "It's not the Sunlace, but she's fast, well armed, and can make a jump in under two minutes."
"What is it, all engine?" Shon asked, amused.
The Takgiba gave him a decidedly sultry look. "It's not the size of the weapon, but how much power you put into it."
The lift came to a stop and the doors slid open. I stepped out first with Uorwlan, placing my hands behind my back again to play the prisoner. An alarm
screeched as the light emitters began to flash, and something came running down the corridor toward us.
The massive humanoid, easily twice my height, had a body like the front end of a land transport. His hands had been replaced by two weapons
somehow welded onto his arms, and he began firing both at us as he charged the lift.
"Drone," Shon shouted.
I had never seen a drone made to look like a living being, but I targeted the center part of the torso and fired. The drone's power core exploded, causing
his enormous chassis to break part into three pieces, which fell smoldering to the deck.
"Move your tail," Uorwlan said, pushing at my back.
Reever and Shon took positions in front of us now, and we went around the remains of the drone and ran for the bay. Halfway down the corridor a door
panel ahead of us opened and a blue-striped white creature leapt out.

Jlorra.
I stopped, disbelief making me rigid. "It cannot be." No one had ever successfully removed one of the six-legged death cats from Akkabarr. Anyone who
had tried had died a messy death.
Beside me, Shon also went still. "It's a torpa," he said, his voice rough. "It's blind but it can feel movements in the air. Don't move, or it will spit its venom
at you."
"What are you talking about?" Uorwlan demanded, gesturing toward the jlorra slowly walking toward us. "That's a pralme. It will gut you with its tusks."
Under her breath she muttered, "I thought we killed them all."
"It's a jlorra," I insisted, raising the rifle. "You have to shoot it in the space between its eyes. It's the only thing that works."
Reever turned to me. "I see a Hsktskt in full battle armor."
"They must have drugged us," Shon muttered.
"No. We all see it differently." I fought back my fear and raised my rifle. "I know what it is."
The jlorra crouched down and sprang at Reever, and I fired. The pulse round had no effect on the big cat. With a shriek of rage, Uorwlan jumped into the
jlorra's path and knocked it to the deck. As she rolled away, Reever somehow adjusted his rifle to produce a stream of fire. The big cat's eyes flashed as
orange as the flames and it screamed and fell writhing and burning at my husband's feet.
As he stepped back, the big cat began to shrink into a long, thin humanoid with ghostly silver-white skin and blunted features. It tried to rise, but its
burning body fell and went motionless.
"Shifter." Uorwlan walked up to the inert form of the Odnallak. "Think you'd scare me with that? I was part of the Great Purge, you scum." She spat on
the body.
Reever looked ahead. "There could be more lying in wait for us. Fire is their only vulnerability." He went around and quickly made the same adjustments
to our weapons. "Remember, they can read our fears and assume the shape of them. Don't trust your eyes."
We hurried toward the bay. Although I knew my eyes would deceive me, I still staggered back when SrrokVar came around a corner and threw at us
handfuls of the bone dust that had caused the plague of memory on Vtaga. The dust vanished along with the nightmarish image of the reconstructed
Hsktskt madman as soon as Reever engulfed him in flames.
We fought our way through a horde of terrifying attackers. I burned a Toskald soldier who had once stabbed me while I'd tried to save his life on the
battlefield, the League general who had enslaved Cherijo, and a glowing ring of energy that tried to suck me into its black maw. Each fell as soon as the
fire from our weapons touched them, and shifted back into their real bodies.
A pair of Hsktskt prison guards, their mouths dripping with red blood, their teeth foul with ragged strips of flesh, entered the corridor. They stopped at
the sight of the burning, fallen bodies, turned, and ran away.
Shon had to blast out the control panel beside the launch bay entrance, which had been locked down, and he and Reever pried the doors apart. Inside
a half dozen crewmen scattered, firing at us while trying to take defensive positions behind the launches. Reever and Shon returned fire until there was
nothing left but bodies on the deck.
"I'll rig a bypass." Uorwlan, clutching a wounded shoulder, went to the airlock control console. "Prep that small scout over there for launch; it's the fastest
thing they've got."
I grabbed a first-aid pack from a storage unit and brought it to the console. "You're bleeding," I told her when she protested. "We need you conscious."
While Reever and Shon boarded the scout and read ied it for launch, I applied a coagulant and a field dressing to the wound on the Takgiba's shoulder.
"He told me that you have a daughter," she mentioned as she worked on the console. "What is her name?"
I secured the dressing. "Marel."
"Does she look like you?"
I thought this was a strange conversation to be having under the circumstances. "She is small like me, and likely inherited my nose, my feet, and my
temper, but Reever gave her the color of his hair and eyes."
"I wanted to give him a child," Uorwlan said. "My kind can't breed with Terrans, so I knew it was impossible. Still, I thought he would make a wonderful
father."
I glanced over at the scout. "He is."
She nodded slowly. "I wanted to tear your throat the moment I saw you, and then I saw the way he looks at you. He told me he couldn't feel love, but I
knew different. He only had to find his other half, and it wasn't me." She gazed at me. "That's why I left him, you know. To give him the chance to find you."

I felt relieved and terrible. "What about you and Shon?"
She laughed. "I enjoyed him, but he's too much like me. You'd better get on board now. I'll have this patch finished in a minute."
I felt reluctant to leave her alone at the console, but nodded and went to the launch. Inside Shon sat behind the helm with Reever at copilot; the two of
them were finishing the preflight checks.
I surveyed the interior. The scout had not been designed to ferry passengers, but there were two emergency harnesses in the back that the Takgiba and
I could use to secure ourselves for launch.
"We're good," Uorwlan said as she boarded and secured the ramp. "That bypass won't hold forever, so get this dink moving."
Shon initiated launch and eased the scout into the airlock. Weapons fire erupted behind us as the massive doors closed and the outer hull doors
parted.
"Fasten your harnesses," Shon called back to us. "This won't be a smooth ride."
It wasn't. As soon as the scout departed the ship, the vessel came around and began firing at us. Shon and Reever worked grimly to evade the volleys,
but as the scout turned and twisted the hull began to shudder under multiple impacts.
I cringed as I heard the boom of a sonic cannon. "We will never make it out of here."
"Don't be a mewling kit," Uorwlan told me. "We've got friends out there now."
I glanced through the viewport and saw two ships pass the scout--a small, fast trader transport and a massive Jorenian star vessel.
The Sunlace's sonic cannons boomed again, forcing the mercenaries to break off their attack to evade impact.
Shon did something that made the scout turn end over end, and flew after the Sunlace.
"We can't risk docking in midflight," I heard Reever say to him. "If the clamps are not perfectly aligned, we'll collide."
"The 'Zangians taught me how to do it," Shon assured him. "They call it poking the shrike."
I held my breath as the scout darted under the hull of the Sunlace and into docking position. Clamps extended, reaching for our tiny ship, and somehow
the oKiaf managed to catch on to them a moment before we would have smashed into the bigger vessel. Above our heads I heard the rumble of retractors
as the scout was lifted into an airlock, and then space disappeared.
"Welcome on board, Major Valtas," Xonea's annoyed voice said over the com. "I assume you did not kill anyone on board your launch with that
foolhardy maneuver."
"All present and accounted for, Captain." Shon powered down the engines and glanced back at the Takgiba. "I would have told him myself."
Uorwlan made a casual gesture. "I saved you the trouble." She released her harness, but instead of moving to the docking ramp she went to the pilot's
seat. "Let me at the console. I want to see how you did that."
Shon rose and then staggered, putting out a hand to brace himself. Crystal claws cut into the plas seat covering.
I went to the docking ramp, lowered it, and then hurried over to the oKiaf. "Reever, help me."
Between us we supported Shon and walked down the ramp.
"I need a gurney," I said, bracing myself as the oKiaf's knees buckled. One appeared a moment later, and two crewmen helped us lift Shon's
unconscious body onto it. "Signal medical. I need an isolation room set up with a dialysis unit, stat."
The deck rocked under my feet as the ship took a massive blast to the starboard hull. I heard alloy groan and emergency alarms going off as a calm
Jorenian voice ordered the bay to be evacuated.
The airlock doors began to close behind us, and I turned to see Uorwlan sitting in the pilot's seat. As the scout's engines engaged, she strapped herself
in and disengaged the docking clamps.
Reever ran over to a com panel. "Uorwlan, shut down the engines and come out of there."
"Not on your life, lover," she replied.
The outer doors opened and the scout flew off, heading for the Odnallak raider.
I sent Shon ahead to medical and went with Reever to the nearest communication station, where he brought up the scout on the viewer and signaled the
Takgiba.
"Turn around and come back to the ship," he ordered. "You can't fight them in a scout. You don't have any weapons. Uorwlan."
"I don't need them," she replied as her image appeared on the screen. She seemed amused. "I'm just going to run a little interference and give you and
the Jorenians some time to get out of here."
"We're not leaving without you," I said.
"Hold on." The Takgiba maneuvered the scout around a heavy burst of pulse fire. "I don't know who that shifter has on weapons, but they're good.
They've taken out your long-range signal array. A couple more hits and they'll take out the Jorenians' propulsion. I can't see you finding a cure for Shon
while you're drifting around the quadrant."
"Shon needs you," I said, seizing on that.
"Shon has everything he needs. So do you." The Takgiba muttered something under her breath as the scout rocked. "I've got to wrap this up; things are
getting snarled out here and it'll be a tight fit as it is. Duncan, I love you. Always have, always will."
"No." He reached out and touched the screen. Uorwlan, no."
"Keep your promise." Her image disappeared, and the signal terminated.
Reever tried signaling again, and then put the view of the scout on the screen. The small ship flew directly into the path of the alien raider, artfully
dodging most of the pulse volleys fired at it.
"What is she doing?" I murmured. "She can't destroy the ship by ramming it."
"She isn't trying to collide with the ship," he said, and took my hand in his.
At the last minute Uorwlan cut the scout's engines, and the nose of the small ship drifted into the large emitter of the sonic cannon. The impact breached
the scout's hull, which imploded, along with the power cells. A brilliant flare of light engulfed the display. It had barely begun to fade when a second, much
more powerful detonation tore the alien raider in half.
I held on to the side of the console and Reever's hand as the shock wave rocked the Sunlace.

Eighteen
Xonea transitioned as soon as the ship was secured, and then performed another two jumps to evade the other alien raiders pursuing us. The attack had
resulted in several casualties, a few serious, but no deaths. Once reality stopped melting into a transitional swirl, I spent the next twelve hours alternating
between surgery and the isolation room where Shon was being treated.
Although I no longer had the supply of heartwood I had collected from the oKiaf--the Odnallak had confiscated it--I was able to glean enough carvings
from the remnants of our native garments to keep the crystal infection in check. The oKiaf drifted in and out of consciousness, and I directed the nurses to
keep him under close monitor.
Herea efficiently managed triage and supervised the treatment of the ambulatory patients, and to reward her efforts I brought her in to operate on a
crew member with a severely fractured pelvis. She didn't hesitate as she gloved and masked and reached for the lascalpel.
"This left hip will need to be replaced as soon as the pelvis heals," she said as she studied the skeletal scans. She glanced at me. "That is, if you
agree, Healer Jarn."
"That's not the standard treatment," I said, and then smiled under my mask. "But you're right. Given her size and weight, performing the usual
reinforcement procedure will only delay the deterioration of the joint. I believe she serves as a security officer, which means she spends most of her duty
shift on her feet. I agree. A replacement is a better solution for the patient."
She sighed her relief. "For a moment I thought I might have to argue the point." Her tone turned curious. "Can you say what happened to Resident Jylyj?
That crystal embedded in his hide--it looks very serious."
As we worked, I related an abbreviated version of what had occurred on the planet, and discussed possible treatment options.
"I can synthesize the resin and continue dialysis until we reach Joren, but we have to purge the protocrystal from his bloodstream." I handed her the
retractor she needed and watched her skillful hands as she exposed a jagged break in the right pelvic bone. "The only substance that repels it, Cu2Au,
would also poison him if I introduce it into the bloodstream."
"It's a pity it isn't attracted to his fur, Healer," the nurse monitoring the anesthesia said. "It would exit the body through his hair follicles and give him a
very pretty pelt."
I stared blindly at her as I remembered fifteen blobs of mold following Shon around the ship like pets eager for attention. "We've used the Lok-Teel
before to remove toxins from patients." I turned to the intern. "Herea, can you--"
She nodded, understanding. "The patient is stable and her vitals are strong. I know what to do, but I will call you if I need any assistance."
I ran out of the surgical suite, stripping out of my mask, gloves, and shroud as I looked for one of the helpful little housekeepers. One crawled up to my
feet and sat there as if waiting.
"Hello," I said as I bent to pick up the mold. "I have a job for you."
I took the Lok-Teel into the isolation room, where Shon was presently sleeping. Gently, I placed the mold next to the oKiaf's crystal-covered arm, and
thought of Shon's paw as it had been. I couldn't force it to attempt to absorb the protocrystal in Shon's bloodstream, but if it was willing . . .
The Lok-Teel read my thoughts as clearly as ever, for it slowly crawled over the paw and stretched itself out over it. At first it settled down and didn't
move, and then it began to undulate and expand.
"What is this?" Shon asked, his voice slurred. "A new type of berth bath?"
"An experiment." I scanned him and checked the level of crystal infection. It had not decreased or increased. "How are you feeling?"
"Heavy-headed." He turned his face toward me, and I saw solid crystal now covered half of it. "It doesn't blind you, you know. I can see through it,
although it does make everything look as if it is composed out of colored light."
The Lok-Teel, now bloated and bulging, inched away from Shon's paw. Crystal still covered it, however, and I felt a crushing sense of disappointment.
"That didn't work," I told him. "We'll have to try something else."
"I thank you, Jarn, but you cannot cure this thing." His remaining eye closed. "Not even if you were the Crystal Healer."
"I'm not giving up," I told him, and picked up the Lok-Teel, which had gone stiff and still. "Rest now. I'll be back to check on you shortly."
I took the mold to the biopsy room and placed its inert form on the dissection table. It appeared lifeless, and I worried that I had killed it by exposing it to
the crystal, but then it suddenly began bubbling and dividing.
I scanned the mold as it divided into two and then four individual Lok-Teel. Their readings were healthy and, thankfully, free of crystal.
"It was worth a try," I said ruefully as the four little molds moved toward me and caressed my hands with their cool, soft surfaces. "I hope you enjoyed
whatever you did absorb from Shon."
The Lok-Teel began moving to climb off the table. Doubtless they were hungry, I thought, and removed the lid from the room's waste container before I
went out into the ward.
There were no more surgeries to perform, so I made rounds of the patients in post-op, wrote up orders for the nurses, and looked in but didn't interrupt
Herea's procedure, which she had almost finished. A yawn almost split my face in two as I watched from the view panel.
"Healer Jarn."
I glanced back at a nurse. "Yes?"
She pointed to the floor, and when I looked down, I saw that every Lok-Teel in medical now waited in a wide mass around my feet.
"What is this?" I tried to step over them, but the Lok-Teel crawled out from beneath my feet and formed two groups on either side of me. Then I looked
down at my tunic, which I had not changed since boarding the Sunlace. "Is this your way of telling me that I need to cleanse?" To the nurse I said, "Signal
me in my quarters if Major Valtas's condition changes."
"Yes, Healer."
It felt good to strip out of my dirty garments and scrub myself under the cleanser. No one would have noticed my condition on Akkabarr, as we rarely
wasted time or water on frequent bathing, but the ensleg had very different standards of personal hygiene. I smiled to myself as I remembered how I had
protested when Reever ordered me to bathe daily. How ignorant I had been, and how changed I was.
I had just finished dressing when Reever arrived. I came out of our bedchamber to greet him but came to a halt when I saw him standing by the open
door panel. What appeared to be every Lok-Teel on the ship were crawling into our quarters.
"I know I needed a cleansing," I said, giving the horde of mold an uneasy glance, "but surely I didn't smell that bad."
"They were waiting outside in the corridor." My husband made a sweeping gesture. "All of them."
"I used one on Shon a few hours ago in an attempt to remove the crystal infection, but the Lok-Teel couldn't absorb it." I crouched down to pick up one of
the Lok-Teel. It crawled away from me and on top of another, engulfing it. I glanced around as the others began doing the same thing, and I looked up at
Reever. "Have they ever joined together like this before?"

He shook his head and closed the door panel. "They may be somehow infected by the exposure to the crystal. Stand back from them." He used the
com panel to signal an environmental hazard alert, which automatically locked down our quarters.
The Lok-Teel by this time had melted together into one gigantic mass, which was shrinking in and growing up into a vertical direction.
I went to the storage container and took out a pulse pistol, tossing it to Reever before taking one for myself. "Shoot it."
"Wait." He pressed a hand to his head. "It's not the Lok-Teel. Something else is present."
The merged mold began to stretch into the shape of a humanoid with a head, torso, and four limbs. The bland beige color of the form changed,
lightening in some areas and darkening in others. The center of the mold turned green and became filmy, like thin fabric. The top of the shape formed a
mass of curly thin red strands.
I knew who it was as soon as I saw the hair. "Maggie."
A half-formed mouth smiled."Hold your horses, slave girl. Borrowing a corporeal form takes some doing."
I held on to the pistol and took a scanner from my case. The readings showed only Lok-Teel and Reever present in the room. "She's not registering," I
told my husband.
"She never does." Reever looked disgusted. "What do you want now, alien?"
"He never calls me Maggie anymore. It's hurting my feelings." Now fully formed, Cherijo's surrogate mother stretched out her arms and studied her redvarnished fingernails. "Interesting. Quite a cooperative bunch, too, unlike some lower life-forms in the room I could mention."
"If we shoot her while she's using the Lok-Teel, will it kill her?" I asked Reever.
"Probably not, but I'd enjoy it, anyway." He aimed for the back of Maggie's head.
"Temper, temper." Maggie flicked the fingers of both hands, and the pistols we were holding went flying across the room. "I can't hold these creepy
things together for much longer, so let's get down to business. You have to tell the Jorenian to turn the ship around, go back, and destroy the raiders
chasing after you. All of them."
I stared at her for a moment, and then laughed.
"That means no," Reever said. "Release the Lok-Teel and get off the ship. Now."
Xonea walked in, his movements stiff and jerky. "Duncan, Jarn," he said, his voice hoarse. "Something has taken control of me."
Maggie waved at him. "That would be me, Captain. Since Grimface and the little woman aren't listening to me, maybe you will. You have to go back and
destroy that raider fleet."
"The ship has sustained heavy damages to the weapons array," Xonea told her. "We cannot attack until repairs are made."
"Offer to surrender," she suggested. "When the raiders come close enough, then you can blow your core."
"I am not destroying the Sunlace or killing my crew," he told her flatly.
"Why do the raiders all have to be destroyed?" Reever demanded.
"The shifters infiltrated the tribe on the surface," Maggie told him. "While you were going native, they were picking your brains every night while you
slept. That's why you always woke up with a headache, Duncan. Even when you were unconscious, you tried to fight them. By the way, you lost, you wimp."
"They made me dream of Trellus?" I stared at her. "Why?"
"They wanted your memories of that happy time. Specifically, of Swap, the friendly neighborhood larval-form omnipotent being. Besides Major Pain-inthe-Ass Valtas, he's the only other being who can accelerate the growth of the black crystal."
I shook my head, trying to make sense of her babble. "Why would they want to do that?"
"You're going to love this: because they believe it will turn them back into what they were before the big breakup." She made a sound of contempt. "We
tried to get through to them that messing with the black crystal is a very bad thing, but when you're the remnant flotsam of the most powerful civilization of
all time, you tend to believe your species' dumb-ass mythology over very wise advice from the people who were actually there when the universe went all
to hell."
"If they know about Swap," Reever said slowly, "then they know what he is."
"Right on the money, big guy. And here I always thought that you were the stupid half of the equation." Maggie turned to me. "Because you've prevented
the mercenaries from capturing Shon Valtas, they're going to Plan B. In a few hours, they will invade Trellus, capture the worm, and force it to be their
alarm clock. When that happens, say bye-bye to everyone and everything that matters, because Swap is going to eat it."
"I don't believe you," I said.
Maggie glowered. "Why else would I send you to a pretty much guaranteed death, kiddo? I mean, you're a nasty bitch with identity issues, but you're still
the closest thing I've ever had to offspring."
"You are no mother to me."
"Yeah, well, as a daughter, you stink, too," she snapped back. "And thanks to the little vacations you and Reever have been taking lately, you've totally
fucked our timeline. For your information, the space occupied by an object undergoing a transformation does not preserve all linear dimensions. There
are no other options now."
I shook my head. "You're lying."
"You want proof? My pleasure." Maggie snapped her fingers, and our quarters became the surface of Trellus. "Here we are a little further along the
present timeline, at everyone's least favorite vacation spot, the colony from hell."
I knew we couldn't be standing on the surface of the planet, for if we had been we would have frozen and suffocated simultaneously. At the same time, I
knew we were there. Somehow Maggie had made that possible.
I glanced over at the domes in which the colonists lived, but they were all dark now. Some had been fired upon and had collapsed atop the ruins of the
structures and dwellings they once protected.
Tall, thin beings in envirosuits marched out of Swap's dome in two columns. Between them slid several tons of an enormous pink worm, now harnessed
to a device that wrapped its amorphous body with thousands of pastel bands. A probe attached to the end of each band seemed to be feeding some sort
of green fluid into the worm's body.
"The Odnallak have forgotten a lot of things, but not how to kill everything that gets in their way," Maggie said, her voice bitter. "Or what controls a baby
rogur."
Swap was led up a cargo ramp and into the belly of a massive alien raider. At the last minute he tried to resist, but the shifters' device pumped more
green poison into his body, and at last he slithered inside.
Maggie snapped her fingers again, and we were walking across a meadow of orange-gray flowers under a red sky.
"Welcome to Naetriht, home of zip." She kicked aside some of the flowers to reveal the ground, which appeared to be made of black crystal. "A few
million years ago, this crap ate everything that might have evolved into something interesting, before it went to sleep." She looked up as shuttles began
descending on the meadow. "I swear, you could set a timing device by these guys."
Odnallak, this time dressed in some sort of ceremonial garments, poured out of the shuttles and took up positions around the edge of the clearing. A
much bigger shuttle flew overhead, opening its cargo doors and releasing Swap, who fell to the ground in the center of the Odnallak.
The worm tried to crawl away, but the Odnallak took out weapons that sprayed it with the green fluid and drove it back to the center of the meadow.

I turned to Maggie. "Why are they doing this to him? He's harmless."
"Actually, no, he's not," Maggie said. "We evolved the Hsktskt specifically to exterminate his entire species, but somehow he escaped the genocide,
and later the attack on the colony. For a worm, he has lives like a cat."
Disgust filled me. "You sent the Hsktskt to Trellus."
"It was a mistake. Occasionally we make them," Maggie admitted. "After that, we saw him taking care of the surviving kids and realized why he hadn't
evolved into the adult form. He may be a planet-destroying monster's maggot, but Swap actually has a good soul."
"Is that why he marooned himself on Trellus?" Reever asked. "To keep from evolving?"
"That, and to study the black crystal. Swap has been trying for millennia to find a way to destroy it, same as us." Maggie gave him a grim smile. "Too
late now."
The orange-gray flowers withered and turned to dust as the ground beneath them rumbled. Swap curled in on himself as massive shafts of black crystal
erupted around him, shifting and crossing each other to form more complex structures. The Odnallak moved in, touching the crystal and calling to Swap,
who had become a tight, pulsing ball.
"What are they doing?" Xonea asked Maggie.
"Oh, they think they're going to be transformed now," she said. "The morons."
A burst of red light came out of Swap and swept through the crystal, which dissolved it. I would have thought it destroyed, until I saw one of the Odnallak
run into the shadowy air where one crystal structure had stood only a few seconds ago. A delicate black haze surrounded the Odnallak, who went still and
began tearing at its robes.
Horror filled me as I saw the haze begin swirling around the shifter, slowly stripping away its skin. The Odnallak screamed over and over as it tried to
get away, but the haze followed it, eating away at its muscles and then its organs, until at last all that was left was a skeleton that toppled to the ground.
The haze descended, swirling gently, and when it lifted again the skeleton was gone.
All around the meadow the same thing happened again and again to the remaining shifters, until all that was left was the black haze and the tight black
ball that had been Swap.
The black haze swirled around the ball now, stripping the dark outer layer away from the worm but not attacking the life-form inside.
Swap had undergone some sort of metamorphosis and emerged from the cocoon as a much larger creature, easily the size of a troop transport, with a
lurid yellow-green hide and a hundred spidery limbs. He had no head, only openings on either end of his body. The biggest opened, revealing acres of
teeth, and the black haze rushed into that terrible mouth, filling and bloating Swap's new body.
I glanced at Maggie. "Will it kill him now?"
"It should be so lucky." She watched, her eyes full. "He's just packing for the trip."
Once all of the haze had been sucked into his mouth, he closed it and changed shape again, growing armored yellow-black scales. He then crawled
across the clearing to the empty shuttles and ate them, one by one, before looking up at the hovering transport that had brought him to the planet.
The ship landed in front of him, and angry Odnallak poured out of it, firing their fluid weapons at Swap. He stabbed his limbs through their bodies and
dragged them to his mouth end, into which he flung them.
I turned away as Swap began to chew. "Stop this, Maggie. I've seen enough."
"Oh, come on," she chided. "He's going to N-jui next, and there's nothing like seeing an adult rogur eat a few cities before it gives birth to several
thousand versions of itself." She watched Swap crawl into the transport, which lifted off a moment later. "Well, maybe when the little ones have their first
meal."
"You've made your point, Maggie," Reever said quietly.
We were back on the Sunlace, standing in our quarters. Xonea had vanished, and Maggie looked terrible.
I started to ask her how she knew about Swap, but her form swayed and then suddenly burst into hundreds of Lok-Teel, which fell to the deck and began
crawling around in a frantic, frightened manner.
"We promised to protect Swap," my husband said slowly. "And as offensive and ridiculous as Maggie is, I think she was showing us the truth. That is
what will happen if the raiders invade Trellus."
"I know. I felt the same thing." I reached down to stroke one of the little housekeepers, which clung to my hand and shivered.
"Duncan," Xonea said over the com panel. "I just had a very long and disturbing hallucination. However, we do not detect a hazard inside your quarters.
Are you clear? Is that redheaded female gone?"
"Yes," Reever replied over the com, but the hazard claxon continued to sound. "You can shut that off. It was a false alarm."
"Perhaps here, it was." My ClanBrother disengaged the lock and entered our quarters. "But we have detected another biohazard on the ship. It's in the
survey lab."
We accompanied Xonea to the survey lab, the corridor to which had been blocked off at either end with the same type of energy curtains that Nalek
Kalea had installed in the containment chamber. One of the ship's engineers had an interior view of the survey lab on monitor, and it showed a dark,
cloudy substance had formed around the black crystal inside the chamber. "Something engaged the failsafe shortly after you sounded the biohazard
alarm in your quarters," Xonea said. "But the probe unit never emerged to encase the specimen container. The control circuits appear to have shorted
out."
I looked at the monitor. "What is the temperature in there?"
"Seventy-eight degrees Fahrenheit," Xonea said. "The same as the rest of the ship."
"The chamber won't hold it much longer, Captain," one of the engineers said. "The protective field is losing power. I cannot be sure, but the specimen
appears to be absorbing it."
"How long until the field is drained?" Reever asked.
"At the rate of power loss, ten minutes," the engineer told him.
"Disengage the corridor seal," my husband said. "I have to go in there and activate the manual override."
"We don't know what type of radiation or energy that crystal is emitting," Xonea told him. "It doesn't register at all on our equipment. Like that female
who took over my brain."
"If I don't eject that crystal before the containment chamber fails, the energy will be released into the rest of the deck. It could cause an explosion or
worse." My husband gestured toward the curtain blocking off the corridor. "You can reactivate it as soon as I'm on the other side."
"I'm going with you," I said.
"No, beloved." He looked down at me. "We can't both risk the exposure."
"I'll wear an envirosuit," I promised. "I'll stay outside the lab doors. You can't do this alone."
Reever glanced at Xonea and then at me. "It's time to tell your ClanBrother about Trellus." He nodded at the technician, who deactivated the energy
curtain.
I tried to follow him, but Xonea grabbed me from behind and held me until the engineer reactivated the seal.

"He will do what he must, Jarn," Xonea said when I turned on him. "Now tell me what I need to know."
As I watched the monitor screen, I told him about Trellus, Swap, and our promise to the Trellusans. I also told him about the alien raider, and the
Odnallak who had posed as Cherijo's father.
"Now I understand why she told me to destroy the ship," Xonea said.
"She knew she would be sending us to our death," I said dully as I watched Reever finish donning an envirosuit before he entered the lab. "But she's
right. We can't permit them to invade Trellus, even if it means sacrificing every member of the crew to stop them."
Reever stood inside the lab now, and moved slowly toward the control console. Once there, he used the suit com to signal us.
"All of the control circuits have been destroyed. I cannot engage the manual override."
Xonea signaled back. "Come out of there, Duncan. We will find a way to seal off this deck."
"There is one more thing." He went over to one of the interior supports by the lab entry, removed a strap from his belt, and began wrapping it around the
support and his waist. "Evacuate the deck now, Xonea."
"What are you doing?" I demanded over the com. "Duncan, answer me."
"Go with the captain, Jarn." He turned his helmet so he could look at the monitor. "Please, Wife. Trust me."
I didn't trust him, but my ClanBrother took my arm again, and I went with him to the nearest lift. "Do you know what he intends to do?"
"I have a good idea." He guided me out of the lift and straight to the nearest wall panel, from which he signaled communications. "Put up an interior
view of the survey lab on this screen," he ordered. As soon as the image of Reever appeared, he signaled my husband. "The deck is clear. Make sure
your tether is secure."
Tether? That meant-Every thought left my head as I watched my husband raise a pulse rifle to his shoulder and fire across the room at the hull. The ship's emergency buffer
should have absorbed the blast, but instead a small hole appeared, and then the wall itself tore open and disappeared into space.
The explosive decompression of the room dragged most of its contents out through the ragged gap. Console panels, storage units, and other
equipment slammed into each other and the remains of the hull before disappearing.
Reever fired again, and I looked over at the containment chamber as the plas sides imploded and the fragments along with the dark cloud inside them
were also pulled out of the ship.
Reever's body was being tugged away from the post, but the strap he had used held. He fired a final time at the base of the specimen container,
loosening and then freeing it from its platform. The cracked sides of the container bulged for a moment, and then it, too, flew out of the ship.
"Engage auxiliary buffer, deck seven," Xonea ordered over the com, and a new curtain of energy formed over the gap in the hull, sealing it off. Reever's
body fell to the deck, but before I could blink, he was propping himself up and looking at the monitor again.
"It's gone," he said through chattering teeth. "Would you send my wife down here? I think I need a doctor."

Nineteen
I signaled a medevac team and went with Xonea to level seven, where the engineers were working to override the pass code and gain entry to the survey
lab.
"The code is one-six-four-one-seven," I said, pushing past them as soon as the doors opened.
Exposure to space had covered every surface in the now-empty lab with a thin layer of ice, including Reever's envirosuit. I ignored the burn of the cold
as I tore apart the strap tethering him to the post and looked into the shield covering his face. Blood stained his mouth, but his eyes were clear and vivid
blue.
"That is the last time I trust you," I told him as the orderlies arrived and handed me my case. I scanned him. "Whenever I am on duty, I think I will lock you
in our quarters."
My husband stood with some difficulty, and pulled off his protective gloves. "I need to send a drone probe after the container. We have to collect it and
fly it into a star."
"You have frostbite, cracked ribs, and hypothermia, so the only place you need to go is medical." I looked over at Xonea. "The captain will see to
cleanup."
My ClanBrother nodded and began issuing orders as the orderlies and I moved Reever onto the gurney and out of the lab.
In medical I treated Reever for exposure, slowly warming his body temperature with thermal packs while performing a more thorough scan of the impact
fractures in his ribs. Thankfully, his chameleon cells were already hard at work repairing the bone damage, and by the time I finished my assessment, his
ribs were healed.
Reever insisted on signaling Xonea to determine the status of the black crystal. When I threatened to put him in restraints, he said, "If the specimen
container was compromised, it may have broken up the crystal. More than one drone probe may be required to collect it."
"One signal," I warned, "and then you must rest."
The captain confirmed that the drone probe had been launched and had successfully tracked down the specimen container. That was the only good
news he had for us, however.
"The probe's readings indicate that the specimen container is still intact," Xonea said. "But the black crystal is no longer inside the unit. It reads as
empty."
"Considering the effect the black crystal has on our equipment, we can't assume that it is," Reever said. "If you would, Captain, program the probe to fly
into the nearest star."
Xonea confirmed that he would, and terminated the signal.
"We must ask Shon to contact oKia," my husband said, rising from the berth. "They may be able to intercept the mercenaries before they reach Trellus."
"Duncan." I barred his path. "I know you have healed, but the chameleon cells burn a great deal of energy when they repair you. You know you are
exhausted."
"So are you." He touched my cheek. "We don't have much time, though, and we must know where the raider fleet is."
Resigned, I followed him out of the treatment room and over to Shon's chamber. The oKiaf was conscious and, after listening to Reever's account of
Maggie's warning, agreed to signal Commander Dagar and ask his tribe for help.
The oKiaf responded quickly to Shon's signal. "The raiders returned a few hours ago, but when we attempted to engage them, they transitioned out of
the system."
"Were you able to track where they jumped to, Cousin?" Shon asked.
"We did," the commander confirmed. "I'll send you the coordinates."
I glanced at the screen as soon as the position of the raider fleet appeared, and then closed my eyes. "They're orbiting Trellus."
The Sunlace had to make four consecutive transitions to reach Trellus, something that nearly caused me to lose consciousness. When my mind
cleared and everything finally stopped spinning, Herea reported that the ship was approaching the colony. The jaunt had come with a high price.
"Too many jumps," she said, shaking her head. "The interdimensional generators have gone offline. We will not be transitioning anywhere for several
days."
Reever and I met with Xonea in command, where he reported what we had feared.
"Two raiders have landed on the surface, and the Odnallak have taken over most of the domes." He turned to me. "We have received a signal from one
of the domes that is currently under fire. A female Terran asked if you were on board. Thankfully, it was not the red-haired one."
"It must be Mercy." I went to a com unit and sent a relay. A distorted image appeared on the screen and slowly coalesced into an unsmiling face.
"Mercy, it's Jarn. We've come to help."
My friend looked grim. "I don't know who these bastards are, but they won't negotiate terms with us. We have two hundred dead, and they're threatening
to begin executing more if we don't give them what they want."
I felt miserable. "They've come for Swap."
"Yeah, well, he's not here. He got a signal from some trader friend of his and left the colony a few days ago. I keep telling them this, but they don't
believe me." Mercy looked over her shoulder as pulse fire erupted over the audio. "They've breached my grid. Jarn, if you can spare some of your
Jorenian pals, we'd--"
The signal and the image abruptly ended.
"The raiders have disabled the colony's transceiver," Xonea said, and his gaze shifted. "Major Valtas."
I turned around to see Shon standing with one arm braced against entry. Crystal streaked over most of his body and had turned his black mane into a
hard mass of glittering silver-white.
"You shouldn't have left your berth," I said, going to him.
"I won't be able to talk much longer," he said, his voice rough. "Or breathe. I can feel the crystal in my throat."
That decided things. "I'm taking you back and prepping you for surgery."
"The dialysis is no longer working. The infection has spread to all my organs. I only have an hour left at most." He eyed Xonea. "Give me a launch. I'll
send a signal to the raiders and draw them away from the colony." He turned to Reever. "The raiders fly in tight formation. We'll need to rig the core for a
five-kim blast radius."
"No. I won't allow you to do this," I told him, furious now. "The Sunlace is a powerful ship. Xonea can attack the raiders. We'll send rescue teams down
to the surface. Shon."
The oKiaf led me outside the room and looked down at me. "You will let me go."

"I have no intentions of--"
Crystal claws touched my mouth, silencing me. "You will let me go because I love you. I love you, more than even Jadaira, and I will never have you. This
is the way I choose to die. So that you and Reever and the Torin and the colonists may live."
"I can't." I saw Reever and gave him a beseeching look. "Please, Duncan, don't let him do this."
My husband held out his hand, and Shon put his paw in it. The two stared at each other in silence for a long time.
"Major," Reever said. "I am a telepath. I have seen. You know how it must be."
"I had hoped otherwise." Shon's remaining eye closed, and then opened. "Very well. I will see you in medical, Healer." He limped off.
I stared after him. "How did you do that?"
"Major Valtas has many gifts. One of them is foresight. He knows this is not his time to die." He rubbed a hand over his face. "I can't explain it, Jarn, but I
feel it just as you do. He is more important than we know. Whatever the cost, we must do everything necessary to keep him alive."
Xonea joined us. "In the event anyone cares for my opinion," he said, "I am not sending a dying man out on a rigged launch. He is too sick to pilot it."
I glanced at him. "You feel it, too, don't you?"
He made an uneasy gesture. "I know it is wrong. Likely that alien female did something to my brain. However, Shon's idea still has some merit. One
pilot flying a launch rigged for core overload might destroy the entire fleet."
"You can't deliberately send one of the crew to their death," I argued. "The raiders have scanners. They will know Shon isn't on the launch."
"I never said I would use a living pilot," Xonea chided. "We have drones for that. Duncan, can you program one of the portable simulator units to project
a duplicate of Major Valtas?"
My husband nodded. "I will need some of Shon's DNA. The simulator can duplicate him exactly from it." He glanced at me. "Do you have any hair or
tissue samples I can use?"
"I've taken a few blood samples for analysis," I said. "I'll send those down to launch bay. Are you sure this will deceive them?"
"I have used a similar ploy in the past. Once I made a group of attacking slavers believe that my ship was crewed by two hundred Hsktskt," my husband
told me. "I can manage a convincing simulation of the major."
Xonea and Reever went to rig the launch while I returned to medical to retrieve the blood samples. Herea met me in the lab and told me that Shon had
returned, but his condition was deteriorating rapidly.
"We may have to intubate him soon," she said, showing me the latest scans.
I gave the blood samples to one of the orderlies and sent him to launch bay before I went in to assess Shon. He was unconscious, his breathing
labored. My readings showed that the crystal growing in his throat now threatened to obstruct his airway, and I snapped out orders for the nurses to prep
him for surgery.
"We'll start by clearing the crystal out of his throat and lungs," I told Herea as we scrubbed. "I also want to take a look at his heart while we have his
chest open." I remembered that crystal now covered most of his upper torso and swore. "I have to find a way to cut through that crystal."
"The lascalpel has no effect on it," the intern reminded me, and frowned. "I have a bone saw in my field pack, but the blade is surgical-grade plasteel."
I thought for a moment and summoned a nurse. "Contact engineering and ask them if they have any copper and gold in their stores. If they do, have
them bring thirty thousand grams of copper and ten thousand of gold to medical."
The nurse looked mystified, but hurried off to carry out my orders.
"We can heat the copper and gold together in the lab's flash kiln, and then use it to coat the saw blade," I told Herea. "We should plate the other
instruments we'll need, as well."
"Won't it take too long for the instruments to cool?" she asked.
"Not if we immerse them in cryofluid immediately after we coat them." I hurried to the lab to prepare the equipment.
A puzzled engineer delivered the metals a short time later. "Healer, we normally do not receive such requests from medical. You do know that copper is
poisonous."
"I know." I grabbed the heavy containers from him and placed their contents in the flash kiln, setting it to melt and mix them together. Herea delivered the
tray of hand instruments we needed for Shon's surgery, and we went to work.
"Healer," a nurse said behind me. "Did you move Major Valtas?"
"No, he's in isolation room three." I saw her expression. "Was he taken into the surgical suite?"
"I went to finish prepping him, but his berth is empty." She made a nervous gesture. "No one saw him leave, but he is not anywhere on the bay."
"Keep working on the instruments," I told Herea, and went in search of my patient. In his condition, Shon should not have gotten far, but I found no sign of
him anywhere on the deck.
My suspicions made me first signal the launch bay. "Major Valtas has gone missing from medical," I told the duty officer. "Watch for him. He may come
there and try to take a launch."
Instead of the duty officer, Xonea replied. "Major Valtas signaled a short time ago, just after we launched the drone ship. Duncan has gone to meet him
on the observation deck."
I felt like slamming my head into the wall panel. "Xonea, I don't know what Shon is doing, but I have to get him into surgery. Send a security team to
meet me there."
I took a lift down to the lowest level of the ship. The plas walls of the observation deck allowed a breathtaking view of the space around the ship, and as
I stepped off the deck I wondered why Shon would come here of all places. I found him standing beside Reever as if they had nothing better to do than
watch the drone-piloted launch luring the raiders away from Trellus.
"Are you mad?" I demanded.
"He can't hear you," Reever said. "The crystal has deafened him." He touched Shon's shoulder, and the oKiaf turned to look at me. The crystal had
nearly covered his mouth, but he was able to wheeze out my name.
"I don't need him to hear or talk to me," I said. "I'm taking him back to medical."
Shon shook his head, and pointed toward the panel. I saw one of the Sunlace's launches slowly flying away from the ship, and all of the raider vessels
in a tight cluster pursuing it. As I watched, something emerged from the surface of a nearby moon and flew on an intercept course for the launch.
I heard the low, resonant humming again, only this time it was coming from Shon's body. The oKiaf sagged but kept himself from falling by clutching the
frame of the panel. At the same time Reever's face twisted with pain and he pressed his hands to the sides of his head.
The hum blanked out my thoughts, and I moved toward them like a nightwalker, no longer in control of my body. My husband was not using a link to do
this; I felt something else--a warm and gentle presence that wrapped around me and spread through me.
I couldn't free myself, and so I watched with the men as the ship that had launched from the moon picked up speed. As it drew closer, I saw that it wasn't
a proper vessel but an enormous transparent bubble filled with an equally gigantic worm.

Swap.
Perhaps it was the distortion of the space between us, but the worm appeared much larger than he had on Trellus. When it drew near the launch and the
raiders, the bubble expanded around the worm and came to a stop directly in front of the Odnallak ships. Then it charged the raider fleet.

One by one the ships tried to evade Swap's strange vessel, but the bubble sent out transparent pseudopods and pulled them into itself. As each ship
was taken into the bubble, Swap began enveloping them, until he had completely devoured the raiders.
"I have them now, Jarn," Reever said in Swap's voice. "I regret I could not intervene sooner, but I had to acquire enough energy to move into the next
stage before I attempted this. You will help Mercy and the others on Trellus? They have many wounded."
Yes. We will go down to the surface as soon as we return. I couldn't answer with my mouth, so I used my thoughts. Swap, you can't hold those ships

forever.
"Ah, I see my friend Duncan did not actually put the oKiaf on the launch. Very clever--that even fooled me." One of bubble's pseudopods stretched out
impossibly long, caught the launch, and brought it back to join the others. "This will help finish it. I would stay and talk with you, Doctor, but my mind is
already fading."
Suddenly I understood what was happening to Swap. You're evolving.
"Unfortunately so. I could not hold it off forever, Jarn. The crystal has been calling me for centuries, but now . . . it will no longer wait." Reever came to me
and kissed my brow. "You are all very courageous beings. I know you will find the answers that I could not."
The bubble changed direction and began to pick up speed again. I was released from the telepathic control over my body, and rushed to the panel to
press my hands against it.
The Odnallak ships fired through the worm as they tried to shoot their way out of his mass. It had no effect on him, and as the bubble disappeared into
the star's corona, the launch exploded, destroying everything inside the bubble but the worm. As it began to turn yellow-green, the star's gravitational pull
drew it down to the fiery surface, where it vanished into the star.
The second explosion sent a wave of light toward the Sunlace, and when it impacted the ship, I lost consciousness.
I woke facedown on the deck, my nose and mouth bleeding. Painfully, I rose and looked over at Reever and Shon. Both of them lay unmoving on the
deck.
"Duncan." I crawled over to him and shook him, but he didn't respond. "Duncan, wake up." He didn't move, and when I checked his pulse, I found it
dangerously slow. Shon was also barely alive.
I dragged myself over to the com panel and signaled medical.
A dazed nurse replied. "Healer, you are needed here. We have many wounded."
"There are two more on the observation deck," I said, wiping the blood from my mouth on my sleeve. "Send some help down here."

Twenty
I sent the nurses to attend to the rest of the wounded, and stationed myself between Reever's and Shon's berths. For hours I watched their vitals,
administered synaptic stimulants at regular intervals, and performed every scan I could think of, but nothing changed. Both men remained locked in a
deep, unchanging comatose state, their life signs barely registering.
I even tried to reach Duncan through my mind, holding his hands and opening my thoughts as I always did when he forged a link with me. Whatever kept
him comatose also prevented any telepathic connection; I felt as if I were slamming into an endless, immovable blank wall.
Was his mind gone? Was there nothing left to wake up?
Refusing to admit defeat, I began skimming through records of coma cases, looking for any treatment that might prove effective. What little I could glean
from the database only made me feel sick. Few deep coma patients ever regained consciousness; most remained in the paralyzed, vegetative state until
their organs shut down or life support was removed.
The hours dragged, and time lost meaning. I accepted a server of tea from one of the nurses and held it until it turned cold between my hands. I watched
my husband's still face, silently praying to see a single muscle twitch or an eyelash move. He lay motionless but for his chest rising and falling in rhythm
with the oxygen being forced into his lungs by the ventilator.
"Jarn."
I looked up to see Xonea looming over me. "There has been no change yet." Was that growl my voice? I cleared my throat. "Forgive me. It's been a
long night."
"You have been here for three nights and days." Gently he removed the datapad from my hands. "I will send in a nurse to monitor Duncan and Shon. You
must go and sleep now."
"I'm not tired." I stood and adjusted the drip on Duncan's IV. "How long until we reach Joren?"
"Unless engineering can repair the damage to the transitional generators, it will be several weeks." Strong hands turned me around. "I spoke to the
nurses. There is nothing more you can do for them."
"They're wrong. That is why they are nurses and I am the doctor." I pushed him out of my way and went around to the other side of Duncan's berth. "As
soon as their vital signs improve, I'll be able to administer stronger stimulants. That will rouse them and allow them to breathe on their own, so I can take
them off the ventilators. I can't do that if I'm sleeping, now, can I?"
"I can have security remove you," Xonea said.
I picked up a suture laser and enabled it. "Then my nurses will have more work to do, because I am not leaving."
"Yes, I can see that." Xonea rubbed his eyes and sighed. "Very well. Signal me if there is a change."
Xonea left. There were no changes. I tested each of the monitors to ensure that they were functioning, and then returned to my case studies. I finished
reading all the records on humanoid coma cases and went on to read the reports on nonhumanoids. I read so much that my eyes began to itch and then
burn.
I switched off the terminal and rested my head against my hand. I needed some saline wash to refresh my eyes, and perhaps something to eat, if I could
force my tight throat to swallow. I would get up in a minute and take care of it, I thought. I could rest my eyes for a moment.
"Jarn."
I opened my eyes to see my husband watching me. "Duncan? You're awake." I stumbled to my feet and looked at his monitors, but they were all dark.
"I'm here." He rose from the berth, pulling the infus ers and IV port from his arms as he stood and held out his hand. "Come with me."
"I can't leave Shon." I turned and nearly bumped into a dark-furred chest. "Oh, my God. You're awake, too."
The oKiaf steadied me. "No, Jarn. Not yet."
I saw Shon's still body on the berth behind him and turned to Duncan, who stood next to his own. "There can't be two of you. I must be dreaming."
"No." Duncan took my hand and interlaced our fingers as the medical bay vanished, leaving us to stand in an open field surrounded by white mist.
"You're awake."
The tall grass around us appeared to be frozen, until I saw that the delicate blades were covered with frost. "Has the weather changed on Joren?"
"Everything changes." The fur of Shon's paw brushed the back of my hand as he looked at Reever. "Do you understand what has to be done?"
My husband nodded and turned his head. "Better than he did."
My joy faded as I saw another man standing off in the distance. "Why is he here?"
Joseph Grey Veil lifted his hand and then disappeared into the wall of mist surrounding the field.
"He was the first," Duncan said, as if that explained everything. "You don't have to be afraid of him, beloved. Or of me, or Shon."
"I'm not afraid." I was perplexed, however. I knew I was supposed to be somewhere else, doing something else, but all that seemed important was
being here. Then I felt something slip from my hair, and reached out my hand. A small purple flower landed on my palm and turned to crystal. "What does it
mean?"
"Everything. Nothing." Shon took my hand. "We have a little time left."
Duncan nodded and twined his fingers through mine. "Time enough for a walk."
I felt like laughing and crying, but I was too relieved to be with them to do anything more than walk. The frost-covered grasses parted before us, offering
a wide path of amber soil etched with scrolls of salt.
"When the universe was young, so were its people," Shon said. "They thought like children, and so they behaved. The greatest darkness, born in the
most innocent of hearts."
I saw the mist wall darkening around the edges of the field, and felt the air grow cold. "We fight the darkness. We have to."
"But we are wrong," Duncan said.
I stopped and pulled my hands free to wrap my arms around my waist. "I'm cold."
"You were born on the ice," Shon reminded me. "Do you remember why?"
"No." Suddenly, deeply afraid, I turned to Reever. "I can't remember. I don't want to. Please don't make me."
"I am with you, Waenara." He looked over my head at Shon. "Is there no other way? I love her."
"As do I," the oKiaf said. "But there is only one path." Shon gestured toward the blackened mist. "It is time to take it."
The men walked away from me and I tried to follow, but the icy grass wrapped around my legs, holding me in place. "Duncan. Shon. Don't leave me.
Please, I want to go with you."
My husband looked back and almost turned around, but Shon put his arm on his shoulders and urged him along.
"Shon, please, no. I can't lose you both." I screamed that, and Duncan's name, until the cold grass wrapped around my throat and choked off my voice.

You must heal her. Heal her.

I grabbed my head, pressing my hands against my ears to block out the sound of a million voices, all speaking in unison. I pitched over into the grass,
shattering the stiff blades.

You must heal her. Heal her. Heal her.
Healer, please wake up.
Healer, please.
Healer.
I tore myself out of the dream and into consciousness. I was back in the medical bay, sitting in the isolation room. I had fallen asleep at the console.
A hum buzzed against my ears, and I turned my head to look at Reever's berth, afraid of what I would see.
A mound of Lok-Teel covered my husband's body; the largest had completely engulfed his head. Each one bulged and flexed as if they were eating him.
The Lok-Teel lived by consuming waste. If Duncan had died while I was asleep-I wrenched myself upright and lunged at the berth, grabbing and pulling away the mold as I shouted for the nurses.
Jorenians filled the isolation room, and many hands helped me strip the Lok-Teel clinging to my husband's body. Behind me I heard a similar
commotion, and I looked back to see three nurses working on Shon, who, like Duncan, was covered with the mold.
"Get them off quickly." I struggled to free the one wrapped around Reever's head, peeling it off his mouth and nose. As soon as I pulled it out of his hair, I
flung it across the room and checked the ventilator junction, which had come apart from the tube in Reever's throat. I heard breathing sounds, however,
and quickly removed the tube.
"He's breathing on his own." All the monitor leads had been disconnected from his body, so I groped for a scanner and passed it over his chest. His
vital signs were strong and stable. Why wasn't he awake?
"Duncan." I put a hand on his cheek and stroked it. "Duncan, can you hear me? Open your eyes."
He did not respond to my voice, and I performed a cerebral scan. My readings made no sense; his brain wave activity had increased three hundred
percent. Even using every synaptic connection in his head, Reever couldn't register at these levels.
I tossed aside the scanner and called for another as I checked his pupils, which dilated normally.
I had never seen such levels of brain activity in any being. The only way I could think to disrupt it was to sedate him or subject him to a bioelectric pulse.
Both might send him back into a coma.
"Healer Jarn," a nurse working on Shon called. "The oKiaf is conscious."
"Watch his monitors," I told the nurse beside me, and went to the other berth, forcing a smile as I met Shon's dark gaze. "That was some nap you took."
"I feel very rested," he said, and sat up as if nothing were wrong with him. He raised his hands and turned them over. "The crystal is gone."
The scan I performed told me the same thing--not a trace of crystal remained in his blood, tissues, or bone. I glanced down to see the Lok-Teel that had
been removed from his body creeping out of the room. They seemed much larger now, and moved sluggishly--as if they had eaten an enormous meal.
Somehow they had done the impossible and removed the crystal that had been killing Shon. But what had they done to Reever?
"You don't have to worry about that funerary ritual anymore," I told the oKiaf, and issued orders to run a comprehensive series of scans on him. Then I
turned back to my husband. "Any change?"
"No, Healer." The nurse handed me a new scanner with a fresh set of readings. His brain wave activity remained at unimaginable levels. "Shon, if you
feel well enough to get out of that berth--"
He was already standing next to me, and placed one of his paws on Reever's forehead as he closed his eyes. All of the fur on his arm stood up as a
faint glow spread out over my husband's face.
I bit my lip as I watched, but after only a few moments the glow faded and Shon took away his paw.
"He is not injured or ill," the oKiaf told me. "I don't know what is causing the synaptic overload, but I can do nothing to stop it." He swayed a little.
"Get back into your berth and stay there."
Desperately, I tried again to forge a link between us, but this time instead of the blank wall, a stream of raw power shoved me back into my own head
so hard I nearly blacked out.
When my head cleared, I called for a gurney. "We're moving him to the neurosurgical suite."
We shifted Duncan's body onto the gurney and I pushed it out of the isolation room. If I didn't bring his brain wave activity down to normal levels, and
soon, his synapses would overload, become damaged, or even burn out.
As we moved Duncan from the gurney to the treatment table, I mentally ran through the Terran conditions I knew that caused neurotransmitter disorders.
One by one I discarded their treatment options, all of which would either have no effect or were too dangerous to try on a comatose patient. I needed a
noninvasive method of regulating brain waves that would not cause his higher or lower functions to be impeded or shut down.
Excessive, rapid discharge of the nerve cells . . .
Epilepsy. "Bring the beta-wave generator over here."
The nurse gave me a bewildered look. "But, Healer, your bondmate is not suffering from insomnia."
I felt like ripping her head off, but forced myself to calm down. "Duncan's neurons are in a state of hyperactivity so elevated that he is virtually locked in
one long epileptic seizure. We've got to break him out of it, and we might be able to do that by inducing artificial betas."
The nurse frowned. "A presynaptic regulator implant or control medications are the standard treatment for epilepsy."
"If he hadn't spent the last four days in a coma, I'd agree with you. And I'll be happy to debate this treatment later, when my husband isn't dying." I
touched her arm. "For now, please, do as I ask."
The nurse wheeled the portable unit over to the treatment table. Together we eased the halo over Reever's skull, attached the wave emitters, and
wrapped a cervical collar around his neck. To keep his brain wave activity under close watch, I also attached an EEG lead over his frontal lobe and put the
readings on a display monitor above the table. The nurse calibrated the generator's controls while I placed a mouth protector over my husband's lower
jaw, which would keep him from choking on or biting through his tongue. When I looked up, I saw Xonea, Shon, and the rest of the medical staff standing
outside the viewer and looking in.
"Why is it that every time I tell that oKiaf to stay in his berth, he ignores me?" I asked my husband. "Have you been coaching him on how best to
aggravate me?"
"The generator is ready, Healer." The nurse sounded as afraid as she looked.
I bent down and kissed Reever's brow before I stepped back from the table. "Begin with ten cycles. Initiate."
The beta-wave generator made no sound as it sent the first pulses of artificial brain waves through the emitter leads and into my husband's brain. I
watched his vitals and for fluctuations in the dense lines of his synaptic activity displayed on the EEG monitor overhead, but saw no change.
"Increase to twenty cycles," I told the nurse.
At some point during the procedure, Shon came into the suite and took up position on the opposite side of the table, watching the readings with me.
"Has there been any indication of atrophy or embolism?" he asked.
I shook my head. "No damage yet. No cause for the hyperactivity, either." I told the nurse to increase the feed again and scanned for any cell loss.
"Whatever is doing this isn't destroying his brain tissue. It's just taken it over. . . ." I looked at the oKiaf. "Could it be the Jxin? Are they doing this to him?"

"If they are, we cannot stop them." Shon took my scanner and passed it over Reever's body, pausing at midtorso. "There is something embedded in his
sternum, just beneath the skin." He looked up at me. "It is vibrating."
I swore under my breath.
"Shut down the generator," I told the nurse, and grabbed an instrument tray. I didn't waste time with pre-surgical procedures but yanked aside the linens,
baring Reever's chest. "I need a specimen container. Shon."
He nodded. "Go ahead."
I used a hand lascalpel to make a shallow incision, and then inserted a probe in the wound, searching until I felt a small, hard mass. The instrument
shook in my hand as I seized and tried to extract the shard. It seemed wedged into the bone, and I swore under my breath as I worked to free it. An instant
later it came free, and I pulled it out of his chest.
The nurse held the open container under the probe, and I dropped it and the crystal inside. I turned back to watch Shon heal the incision, and then
looked up at the EEG monitor.
The number of lines displayed slowly began to diminish, one by one, until Reever's brain wave activity had been reduced to that of a normal sleep
pattern.
"Keep him on monitor and prepare to run a chest series." My shoulders slumped as my adrenaline ran out and I felt the weight of exhaustion grinding
into my bones. "If his vitals remain stable, we'll move him over to the critical-care room, and then . . . and . . ." I frowned, trying to concentrate. "Do
whatever else needs to be done."
"Jarn." Shon brought a linen to me and wiped my husband's blood from my hands. "Let me see to him."
I looked up at him. "You were dying thirty minutes ago. Besides, I have a few hundred tests I have to run on you, too." If I could just remember what they
were.
"I think they can wait. Come." He guided me out of the suite. "There are two berths in critical care. I think Duncan would like yours to be the first face he
sees when he wakes."

So would I.
I waited until they brought Duncan to the critical-care room before I occupied the adjoining berth. The moment I did, exhaustion became my dictator and
I bowed to its will. I closed my eyes, wondering if I might have another of the crystal dreams, but nothing came but blessed, mindless darkness. Later, one
of the nurses told me that I had slept so deeply that I didn't move once in eighteen hours.
I woke, as Shon had promised, still looking at my husband's face. I reached across the narrow space between our berths and touched his hand, my
fingers pressing against the pulse point in his wrist.
Slowly, Duncan turned his hand and covered mine. "How long have I been unconscious?"
I glanced at my wristcom. "Almost five days." I sat up, wincing as my unused muscles protested, and made my way over to him. "Do you remember
anything?"
"Swap embracing the stars. Pain. Walking with you and Shon through a field of crystal." He frowned. "It must have been a dream. Your father was
there."
"You had a piece of crystal lodged in your chest." I touched the place where I had cut it out of him. "When Swap died, you and Shon collapsed and went
into deep comas. He did that to you, didn't he? Through the crystal."
Reever sat up and slowly shook his head. "He wasn't trying to hurt us. He was a powerful telepath, on an order I can't even begin to describe. He
projected his last thoughts to the crystal, hoping it would relay them to one of us."
"His last thoughts plus the crystal could have killed you." I didn't want to know what they were. "Shon only remembers the suicide, and nothing after that."
"It wasn't Swap's fault," Reever insisted. "We are very primitive compared to him."
"Swap was a larval life-form," I said. "There is very little more primitive than that."
"Rogur live for eons. Swap came to consciousness before the Jxin formed their first tribal settlement. Suppressing his development allowed him to
retain his sense of reason and awareness of other life-forms as intelligent entities. Although I could only receive his thoughts, I sensed the knowledge he
possessed. He sought to understand everything he encountered, and in the end I think he did." My husband's voice fell to a near whisper. "Jarn, compared
to us, Swap was like a god."
Reever might find that wondrous, but I had seen what communicating with Swap had done to his mind. My husband had come very close to having his
brain fried by the telepathic powers of the worm-god. "Why would he bother trying to send a message to us, then?"
"He told me that we were wrong about the black crystal," Reever said. "It is not a disease or an enemy. It is beyond that, a part of the fabric of all things
that have been or will be. The Odnallak did not create it; they only gave it form. And no matter what we do, it cannot be destroyed."
"I don't understand. Maggie said it was sleeping now, but when it wakes up, it will destroy every living being in the universe."
"Swap knew this. He, too, said it would happen--unless we can stop it before it awakens."
I threw my hands up. "How are we to stop something that we can't destroy?"
"I think that part of the message he meant for you." Reever took my hands in his. "He said you could stop it. By healing it."
I drew back. "Healing a mineral. Daevena Yepa, Duncan, how am I to do that? Rub it down with silica? Feed it iron supplements? It's not alive. It doesn't
feel pain. It's barely organic."
"I can't tell you. Even with all his knowledge, Swap didn't know how it could be done, or I think he would have done it. That is why he sent the message to
me and Shon; why he risked killing us to do so. He hoped that one of us would live and remember enough to tell you."
"Tell me what? Riddles with no answers? If he did not know how to heal the crystal, then how could he expect that of us? We are only . . ." I trailed off and
closed my eyes as I realized the answer to my own question.
"We are immortal," Reever finished. "As he was."
"So if we do not die, we will have the time to acquire knowledge as he did. Then all we must do is formulate a cure. For sick rocks." Bitterness soured
my voice. "For the sake of the universe, we must stay forever young and watch our friends, our allies, our daughter grow old and die."
Xonea came into the room. "It is good to see you awake, Duncan." He turned to me. "Jarn, there is something wrong with the Lok-Teel. They have
gathered in one spot and have attached themselves to the deck."
"They're probably sleeping," I said. "They prefer to be stationary when they rest."
"They're in the survey lab, and they're not sleeping," my ClanBrother told me. "They appear to be melting."
Reever felt well enough to accompany me down the corridor to the survey lab, which remained sealed off from the rest of the ship.
"How did they get past the buffer seals?" Reever asked Xonea.
"An alarm went off a few minutes ago, indicating that the buffer had been breached, then reset itself. I came down to investigate." Xonea gestured
toward the welded door panels to the lab. "That is what I found."
The door panels appeared as if they had been peeled away to form an uneven opening. In the center of the buffer field, a ring of Lok-Teel hung, tightly

constricted. Beyond them lay a pile of more mold on the icy deck of the survey lab. Although the airless chamber was open to space, and should have
frozen them solid, they seemed to be turning to liquid--melting, exactly as Xonea had described.
"Have you scanned the lab?" I asked, studying the bizarre scene.
"I attempted to," Xonea said. "Whatever is happening in there, it does not register at all on our equipment. My scanner does not even detect the mass
of mold."
"They absorbed all of the crystal infecting Shon's body. It must be the reason they're melting instead of freezing." I turned and saw Reever's expression.
"What is it?"
He grabbed my wrist and linked with me. Go back to medical and wait for me there.
I'm not leaving you. I squinted as a bright light erupted from the interior of the wrecked lab, and put up my hand to block it.
The Lok-Teel had disintegrated into a pool of clear liquid, which began to shrink in on itself as a column of light rose from the pool's center. The light
intensified, turning all the alloy around it red with heat. Distantly, I heard alarms ringing and the pounding of running footsteps, but I could not move my eyes
away from the light.
The column of light turned to semiliquid crystal, which flowed into the form of a humanoid being. As it solidified, the light dimmed, but the crystal
remained transparent. The pool vanished under the feet of the crystal being.
It had no features or gender, only four limbs, a torso, and a head. When it moved toward the buffer, I was able to turn my head. Reever looked frozen.
Xonea fell to his knees beside me and began murmuring a prayer to the Mother of All Houses.
I moved closer to the buffer, until there were only a few inches between me and the crystal being. I saw the protocrystal form a mouth on the front of the
head, which smiled at me before it opened to speak. I heard its voice inside my head.
Were you able to defeat the mercenaries? it asked.
"Yes," I said out loud. "Their ship was destroyed by the larval rogur."
The head nodded. You and your comrades have done well, child.
It felt so familiar to me that I almost tried to reach through the buffer to touch it. "Who are you?"
The regular and periodic arrangement of atoms within a structure is a characteristic not only of crystals but of nearly all solid matter. It spoke in
Reever's voice, repeating his words to me. In that sense, every inorganic thing you can touch is crystalline in nature.
"I don't understand." Frustration welled up inside me. "Are you alive? Are you the crystal?"
It didn't answer me. Add something that is not--heat, radiation, a soul--and the structure is transformed or destroyed . . . or becomes something that

cannot be named.
It was trying to tell me something important. "You mean that you have no name?"

Before the light was brought from the darkness, they had no name. Before the heavens were lifted above the earth, they had no name. Before the
beginning was taken from the end, they had no name. Divided, they chase each other, always apart but forever longing for what was. Needing to be
whole. To be healed.
"Are you Maggie?"
Light rayed out from its face, bathing me in a cool blue glow. You know what you must do, Daughter.
I cried out as the light filled my eyes, my mind, and my soul. I felt Reever's hands pulling me away from the buffer as the crystal being dissolved into pure
light. Only when it vanished did I understand what it had said, and what the crystal dreams had meant.
The time for the sacrifice had arrived.
I left the Sunlace, and found myself walking along a shore of amber sand. The waves lapped at my bare feet and drew back, leaving small, perfect
t'vessna blooms on the shore.

Mama.
Marel came running to me, and I knelt and caught her in my arms. My baby. I held her tightly, burying my face in her hair.

Mama, don't leave me. Take me with you.
I drew back and looked into her tear-filled eyes. Do you know how much I love you?
She nodded, sobbing.

Remember that, and I will always be with you.
I picked her up into my arms and carried her across the dunes, where Duncan stood waiting for us.
No. He was shaking his head. I waited. I believed. Not this. Not this.
I handed our daughter to him and kissed him. Xonea was right, Osepeke. Nothing that is lost is gone forever. It is my turn to wait now.
He tried to hold me, but I eased away and turned to face the sea. Light from a figure walking out of the water beckoned to me.
I glanced back at the ones I loved, and then I slowly made my way down the sands.
She was beautiful and kind, and held my hand in hers. You are ready.
That she had given me this time with Duncan and Marel made me strong enough to answer her. Yes.

Then come, child.
Together we walked into the warm dark sea, and the last thing I heard before the waters closed over my head was Duncan Reever calling my name.
Someone carried me into medical and put me on a berth. I felt the hands of nurses and the cold touch of instruments. I must have sustained a head
injury, because it certainly felt as if someone had bludgeoned me repeatedly with a blunt object.
"Her vitals are low but stable," a woman's voice said. "No evident injuries."
"She was exposed to some form of radiation." That voice belonged to Reever. "It had no effect on me or the captain."
I didn't remember any radiation, only pain and cold, and then a terrible explosion of light. I lifted my hand to my face and groaned. "Ouch." I tried to open
my eyes and squinted. "Could you turn off that light please?"
"She is conscious and speaking, Linguist Reever," the nurse bending over me said.
I blinked a few times before my eyes focused on Duncan's face."My head hurts, that's all." I didn't like not knowing why, though. "What happened? Did
we transition?"
A furry paw passed a scanner over my head. "No indications of radiation poisoning."
I didn't know the male standing over me, so I pushed the instrument away and propped myself up on my elbows. I was in the medical bay on the
Sunlace--not where I remembered being. "What am I doing here?"
"You lost consciousness after the crystalline being vanished," Reever said. He brushed some hair back from my eyes. "I think she's all right."
I had no idea what he was talking about, but attributed that to trauma-induced amnesia. "Can I get off this berth? I'm sure someone else can put it to
better use."
Reever helped me down and pulled me into his arms, hugging me so tightly I squeaked when I tried to breathe. "Forgive me," he said, setting me at

arm's length. "I thought I had lost you."
"I'm right here." I didn't like the way everyone was staring at me. "Are there any wounded?"
"No. None." He kissed me.
I enjoyed the embrace, although I felt a little uncomfortable kissing my husband in front of the entire medical staff. Normally, Reever wasn't this
demonstrative; I must have scared him pretty badly this time.
"Hey." I drew back and grinned. "I'm not going anywhere. Tell me about this crystalline being. How did it get on the ship?"
"The Lok-Teel liquefied themselves into a pool of protocrystal. The being formed itself out of their remains. I couldn't hear it, but I think it spoke to you."
He cradled my face between his hands. "You don't remember any of it, do you?"
"No, but it seems like I'm a little blurry on a lot of things." I rubbed the sore spot just above my right temple. "You're sure I didn't hit my head on
something? It feels like someone took a sledgehammer to it."
Reever's face turned to stone. "You know what a sledgehammer is?"
"A large hand tool used to smash holes in very hard things. Like my skull." I probed one temple and grimaced. "Whatever they did hit me with, it
worked."
My husband grabbed my shoulders in an iron grip. "What is your name?"
"You've got to be kidding." I laughed, until I saw he wasn't. "Reever, I'm drawing a whole stack of blanks here, but I do remember my name, and yours,
and . . ." I looked around me and didn't see a single familiar face. "Okay. Wait a minute."
Reever released me, and his hands fell to his sides.
The tall, furry resident who had been scanning me on the table put one paw on my shoulder. "Don't be afraid, Healer Jarn."
I didn't know who he was, but he was a little too touchy-feely for my liking. "Keep your paws to yourself, pal." So I turned to the one face I did know--my
husband's. "Duncan, what the hell is going on? Who are these people? How did I get here?"
He didn't answer me. "Tell me your name."
"What, did you forget?" I laughed, but it made my head hurt. "Reever, it's me. Cherijo. Cherijo Torin Reever. Your wife."
He stared at me for a long time. "Jarn." He strode out of the room.
"Right." Utterly mystified now, I turned to the resident. "Who's Jarn?"

About the Author
S. L. Viehl lives in Florida with her family. A USAF veteran, she has medical experience from both military and civilian trauma centers.

PRAISE FOR
Secrets of the Sands
“...a lushly visual and highly detailed world of desert tribes, a language of beads, and a unique way of
viewing the world.”
--Library Journal
“intriguing...engaging.”
--Publishers Weekly
“Secrets of the Sands, the first novel of Leona Wisoker, is a truly amazing accomplishment. Restrained
yet tense, compelling, intricate and imaginative, it contains so much of the everything lacking in most
modern fantasy one can find oneself moved to tears when the pages finally run out. If all first novels were
this good, no television would ever be turned on again.”
--CJ Henderson, author ofBrooklyn Knight
“Leona Wisoker is a gifted storyteller and in Secrets of the Sands she has succeeded in crafting a
refreshingly unpredictable tale set in a stunningly rich and detailed world.”
--Michael J. Sullivan, Author of the Riyria Revelations series
“With a flair for evoking exotic locales and an eye for detail, Leona Wisoker has crafted a first novel
peopled by characters who are more than they first seem. From the orphaned street-thief who possesses
an uncanny ability to read situations and people, to the impetuous noblewoman thrust into a world of
political intrigue, Wisoker weaves a colourful tapestry of desert tribes, honour, revenge, and an ancient,
supernatural race.”
--Janine Cross, author of the Dragon Temple Saga

Secrets of the Sands
by
Leona Wisoker
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner whatsoever without
written permission, except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical articles and reviews. For
information address Mercury Retrograde Press.
This is a work of fiction. Any similarity to real persons, living or dead, is coincidental and not intended by
the author.
Copyright © 2009 by Leona Wisoker
Interior illustrations by Ari Warner Copyright © 2009
Cover design Copyright © 2009 by Michael J. Sullivan.

Page 1

Used by permission.
First Trade Edition – published 2010
Printed in the United States and the United Kingdom
MERCURY RETROGRADE PRESS 227 Sandy Springs Place
Suite D374
Atlanta, Georgia 30328
www.MercuryRetrogradePress.com
ISBN 978-0-9819882-3-8
Library of Congress Control Number 2009-939060

Acknowledgments
I have so many people to thank; so many who believed in me when I didn't know how to believe in
myself. Parents, grandparents, siblings, husband, stepdaughters, in-laws, and friends all served a vital role
in the process; I am even grateful to many people who are no longer in my life, as they were, for good or
ill, a critical part of moving me further along the path to where I am now. I suspect the full gratitude list
would stretch for ten single-spaced pages, far more than I have room for here.
A few specific names rise to the extreme top of this long list, however: my mother, who showed me how
to fight for myself and patiently put me back together over and over when I fell off the wall, scattering bits
of yolk everywhere; my husband Earl, without whose unwavering emotional support, and willingness to
cook dinner on occasion, I never would have completed this book, much less dared to try for a
publishing contract; my cousin Rhoda, who remains an enduring source of dance, laughter, joy, and
strength in my life; every single one of the beautiful folks at Green Man Review, who nudged my writing
up several notches simply by allowing me into their company of merry jesters, wise men, and scholars;
John Adcox, who unwittingly, with his seemingly limitless creativity and energy, kept my competitive spirit
fired up during difficult moments; Patrick, whose deeply rooted strength and unwavering belief in me is a
most precious bulwark in my life; Todd, without whose help I would still be smoking two packs a day,
and who also showed me the way to a truce with my shadow-self; James Franchese, a high school
English teacher I've unfortunately lost track of, for encouraging me to write, delivering much-needed
reality checks, and pestering me about overdue homework assignments; Alan and Georgia, who were
gracious enough to open their home and their hearts to me during a very chaotic period in my life; artist
Ari Warner, whose hard work on the maps has brought a rough vision to vibrant life; my agent, Judith
Bruni, who took a chance and opened the door for me; and my very own Blue Fairy, Barbara Friend
Ish, who worked even greater magic than turning a wooden doll into a real boy: she turned a trembling
newbie into a real author and a fuzzy fledgling of a novel into a soaring golden eagle.

Dedication
Page 2

This book is dedicated to my grandmother, Martha Pfleger, who always urged me to write down my
wild stories. This one's for you, Omama; I wish I could put this book in your hands and see your smile
again.

Contents
Royal Library Map no. 123:
The Southlands and Southern Kingdom .................................................. 11
Secrets of the Sands............................................................13
Secrets of the Sands Glossary and Pronunciation Guide .............. 359
Appendix A: Desert Families ............................................................ 365
Appendix B: The Bead Language of the Southlands ..................... 379
Appendix C: An Examination by Loremaster Council no. 1576of Gerau Sa'adenit'sA History of Places
............................................ 383
Appendix D: Excerpted Notes from Loremaster Council Records ..................... 387

Royal Library Map no. 123:
The Southlands and Southern Kingdom
Visit http://www.MercuryRetrogradePress.com/Worlds/ChildrenOfTheDesert/map.pdf

Secrets of the Sands

Chapter One
Hee-ay, hee-ay: the cry of the water-seller in the broad and the narrow places;shass-shass-shass , the

Page 3

warning signal to clear a road for noble blood, be it one or many together.Iiii, iii-sass, iii-sass, the wailing
of a merchant who protested his certain ruin—with overtones of castration— should he lower the price
any further. To Idisio's sensitive ears, the cacophony wove a melodic pattern that steered him, unerringly,
to the best possible target.
At the height of his madness, the previous king had issued a decree forbidding residents of Bright Bay to
speak anything but the common northern tongue. Two months later he had died of less-than-natural
causes. Whether that absurd law had been the final wring on a mad aspjacau's tail would never be
known; rumor said the new ruler, now six months on the throne, still worked day and night to untangle
the mess left behind by his predecessor.
Idisio listened for more than words, in whatever language, as he worked his way through the cobbled,
paved, and sand-gravel streets of Bright Bay. The most important sounds of the city had nothing to do
with speech. The clink of a full purse at the side of a foolishly confident merchant meant meals for the
next few nights. The solid crunch of guard boots nearby meantseek cover : although the worst had
quickly been culled under the new regime, changes in permitted behavior were slow to filter to the street
level. But hisses and whistles were more important than any of those. They served as coded warnings
from the other thieves scattered throughout the city.
A strident whistle from a rooftop lookout could save Idisio's life: while no true organization of thieves
existed in Bright Bay, no one thief could ever hope to keep track of all the powerful people who moved
through this sprawling city. The open warning, given by those who knew to those who didn't, was a
traditional obligation that only the most foolish newcomers to the trade ignored.
Idisio had grown up on these streets and survived the madness that had temporarily given Bright Bay the
nickname “Blood Bay.” Those thiefcalls had saved his life many times, and he'd passed on as many
warnings; but many thieves, along with nobles, commoners, and priests, had fallen during the last weeks
of Mad Ninnic's reign. While the worst of the madness had passed, the streets would never be safe for
Idisio unless he found a more respectable—and legal—trade.
He considered that as likely as an asp-jacau meowing.
As he slid between fat and thin, clean and unwashed, his breath clogged with the hot smell of a crowded
southern city on a summer day. A light touch on a thick wallet bound at a man's side prompted a
certainty:gold . Not the half-rounds he normally counted himself lucky to get, but uncut disks of gold:
more than one, many more. Idisio always knew, just from a touch, if the purse held anything worth
taking; other thieves, seeing him withdraw from a mark empty-handed, had learned to steer clear
themselves.
Idisio decided that any man foolish enough to carry gold in an outside purse deserved to lose it all. He
reached, fingertip-knives busy, and had three of the four strings cut before another breath had passed.
Too late, he heard the warning:tee-tee-tee-awrk! tee-tee-tee-awrk! The loud, insistent call resembled
that of a common sea-bird, but that particular bird never strayed this far from the docks proper. One of
the roof lookouts was sending an urgent, if belated, “stay-clear”; and with the intuition that had kept him
alive so far, Idisio knew he was the one being warned.
He started to slide away into the crowd, but found his wrist gripped in the mark's hand, a larger and
harder one than his own. He followed the line of the arm up. Dark, hawk-hard eyes glared at him from a
narrow face containing a sharply hewn nose, bronze skin, and thin lips—reason enough for the tardy
warning.

Page 4

Old blood was in that face; desert blood, noble blood—definitely someone to stay well and truly away
from. Idisio had never before been so stupid as to grab a purse without checking the appearance of the
mark for danger signs first; but it only took one mistake, and this had been it.
“My lord,” Idisio said, caught without escape. He reached for an excuse, an apology, anything that would
loosen that deadly dangerous grip and give him just a moment to run like he'd never run in his life.
The grip tightened, grinding the bones of Idisio's wrist together; the very real prospect of death right here
and now ran cold down his back. The slender finger-blades fell from his hand, landing on the paving
stones with a distantclink .
Something about the noble's touch sparked his erratic intuition:He won't kill me . The surety faded,
though, when he looked up into the man's dark stare.
“Who sent you after me?” the noble demanded.
Idisio ran through a rapid list of names in his head, searching for one that might get the grip on his wrist
released in a moment of fear. In the face of that desert-hot glare, he could only say, “Nobody, my lord.”
He wouldn't put his worst enemy in the path of that stare. And he didn'thaveany names that might rattle
this man.
“Liar,” the noble said, pulling Idisio a step closer, thin lips stretching back. “Who?”
“What's going on here?”
For the first time in his life, Idisio blessed the arrival of the whiterobed guards. There were four in this
patrol, all carrying the thick staves of their office. At their side, an asp-jacau, tall and narrow, raised its
thin snout and sniffed at the air, head tilted to allow one pale blue eye to study him.
Idisio let out a gasping breath of relief. Asp-jacaus only went out with King's Guards. Even a southern
noble had to respectthem . But the man holding Idisio either didn't know that or didn't care.
“Just a pick-thief,” he said briefly.
“We'll handle it.” A guard's hand landed on Idisio's shoulder from behind, closing into a hard grip that
pinched a tender spot; Idisio hissed and flinched. The fingers dug in deeper, and Idisio squirmed, praying
he wasn't dealing with an unculled “Ninnic's Guard”.
The noble didn't loosen his hold, either. “I claim justice-right.”
“But—”
“I'm summoned to the king. Argue my right with the king. Argue the time with the tide that goes by. Let
us pass!”
Idisio felt his bladder weaken, and clamped down just in time. He'd never had that extreme of a reaction
before, but this mistake could cost his life.
Claiming justice-right marked the man as a full desert lord.They didn't consider themselves subject toany
kingdom laws. Many of them offered no term of courtesy beyond “lord” to the king himself.

Page 5

And he had heard that desert lords, when angry, took their price in blood . . . slowly. Idisio might be
better off with a potentially sadistic guard after all. But his odd intuition insisted:He won't kill me. This is a
good thing happening.
Idisio wondered if he were losing his mind.
The guards gave way. The desert lord yanked Idisio forward. He trotted at the man's side, wrist bones
no longer in danger of breaking but still held bruisingly tight.
“Give me no trouble,” the noble said. “I'm not in the mood for it.”
“You're hurting me,” Idisio whined, deciding to give pathos a try, and dragged his step.
“I just saved you a notch on the ear at the least,” the noble snapped, with no change in pressure. “You'll
live through a bruise or two. Hurry up; I'll drag you if I have to.”
Idisio matched the man's pace, feeling like a child against the noble's towering height and determined
stride. He said, desperate now, “Nobody sent me, my lord. I swear.”
“I'll ask of you later,” the noble said ominously. His pace quickened yet again; Idisio jogged at his side
and soon had no breath to protest further.
They swept through areas of increasing wealth, where Idisio had never dared move so openly. Plain
clothes gave way to fine silks; brightly painted merchant stalls replaced worn storefronts. Horses stepped
delicately through the corridors that opened for them in any crowd. Idisio even glimpsed the distinctive
purple, gold, and black tabard of a King's Rider, honored emissary and royal news-bearer throughout
the kingdom.
Spaces grew wider as they neared the palace grounds, the heart of Bright Bay. This area was no less
sprawling than the rest of the city. It boasted seventeen gates into the grounds proper; at least fifteen
noble families lived inside the miles of costly iron fence, along with enough merchants and storehouses to
make the palace a small city in its own right.
The noble headed for the Crown Gate. Gold had been cast in great loops around the grim iron bars,
decorated further with river-opal, diamonds, and bits of moon-shell—not particularly attractive, except to
a thief skilled at prying gems from their settings. The guards protecting this gate stood sentry as much to
keep that from happening as to ward against intrusion.
The noble went forward as if intending to simply walk right through the open gates, ignoring the guards
and horizontally lowered pikes in his way. He stopped at the last second, the shaft of a pike almost
touching his chest. Idisio, staggering at the jarring halt, bumped into the pole.
“I'm summoned to the king,” the noble said, staring at the guards around him as if expecting them to bow
on the spot.
“And this one?” The man wearing the white braid of command pointed at Idisio.
Idisio opened his mouth, hoping to get the guards to take him away from this madman. As his wrist bones
tightened again, he abandoned the notion. He stood quietly, eyes downcast, gritting his teeth against the
fire flowing from wrist to elbow to shoulder and neck. His hand began to go numb.

Page 6

The grip loosened a little, just enough to allow prickling sensation to shoot through his hand.
“He's mine,” the noble said briefly. “I'll speak for him.”
A quick glance up showed the guards surveying him skeptically. He tried to look meek and innocent.
Whether he succeeded or his captor's obvious status dominated, the guards finally stepped aside and
allowed them through.
The pace resumed, Idisio jogging along beside the long-legged stride.
“You needn't hold me,” he said, darting a quick glance up to the noble's stern face. “I couldn't get
anywhere; I'd be grabbed right away if you weren't with me. I'll stay with you, lord. I swear.”
The noble paused, considering. “Very well,” he said at last, and let go. “Mind, if you try to run. . . .” He
lifted a corner of his tunic to show a pair of long-handled throwing knives with hilts of solid ebony.
Any hopes Idisio had of escape failed immediately.
“Yes, my lord,” he said humbly, his stomach once again queasy with fear. Only weapon-masters used
ebony on their weapon hilts; this noble had to be one of the best knife throwers in or out of the kingdom
to be carrying those at his side.
As blood rushed back into Idisio's hand, the pain increased. Cradling the hurt arm in the other hand, the
boy hurried obediently at the noble's side, trying not to moan in agony even as he gaped at the astounding
sights unfolding around them.
They entered a wide space filled with flowerbeds and statues, fountains and benches where a strolling
courtier might take his ease with his latest lady of favor. No smell of trash and marsh could be found here:
instead, a faint breeze stirred up the scents of rosemary and roses, whitemusk flowers and tall,
red-flowering sage.
Idisio breathed deeply, overwhelmed; he'd never known such luxury. Knowing it now, he fiercely wanted
it for himself. The thought of returning to the streets and lifting half-rounds from an unfortunate's purse
seemed, suddenly, worthless as a worn wooden half-bit. And that damned intuition kept nagging:This is a
good thing happening. Stay with it.
Maybe he wasn't losing his mind, after all. He started to sort through possible ways to stay in this magical
place. Perhaps he could plead for a job, throw himself on the king's mercy. Was he really going to be in
front of the king? His step slowed as that thought fell on him with the force of a fish-eagle's plunge. His
knees wobbled, not wanting to carry him forward.
Even the noble's pace eased as they moved through the cloud of scent shaken loose by the light wind.
Eventually he took a deep breath and resumed his quick stride, not looking back to see if Idisio followed.
Idisio hurried to keep up, trotting along at the man's side and keeping his eyes ahead as best he could.
Moving too fast to properly focus on his surroundings, Idisio managed only a series of fleeting glimpses:
silk curtains, elaborate tapestries, luxurious rugs, ornate chairs. He put a hand to his mouth, afraid he
would start to drool with envy. They entered a series of hallways, turning this way and that, up and down
short flights of stairs, until Idisio considered himself thoroughly and unusually lost.
Finally they stopped in front of a small grey door. Two guards with gold and silver braids looped on their
sleeves watched as they approached, offering no challenge but also no welcome. The noble made a

Page 7

polite motion of greeting and stared at the door as if expecting it to be opened for him.
“Lord Cafad Scratha,” he said briefly. “I'm expected.”
“Yes,” one of the guards said. “Go in.”
Idisio's mouth dropped open. All tales he'd heard claimed Scratha Family had been wiped out almost
twenty years ago; nobody knew why or by whom. Apparently one survivor hadn't been worth
mentioning. A complete slaughter must have made for a more dramatic story.
Looking sour, Scratha pushed open the door. It swung noiselessly inward, and they walked into the
king's presence.
Not into the throne room, as Idisio had expected, but a small apartment of sorts, filled with bright
sunlight. Idisio glanced up, his jaw sagging once more. Thick panes of fine glass, some sand-cast, others
clear, were set in the ceiling, arranged in an eight-pointed star pattern: the traditional king's symbol. The
display of wealth and power made the Crown Gate look cheap.
“Lord Oruen,” Scratha said.
Idisio brought his attention hastily down and sank to his knees in belated courtesy.
“Up,” Scratha said. “This is an informal audience.” His expression hardened as he looked back to the
man across the room.
King Oruen stood easily as tall as Scratha and had the same eagle's nose, dark hair, and narrow build.
His skin seemed a lighter shade of bronze, his eyes round where Scratha's held distinct angles. The royal
robe hung neatly on a hook to one side; he wore a simple, if finely cut, outfit of blue and green cotton. If
not for the robe and the “Lord Oruen” from Scratha, Idisio would have thought this man simply a
high-ranking court official.
“Informal,” the king agreed. His dark eyes studied Idisio for a moment. “Is this boy needed?”
Without thought intervening, before Scratha could answer, Idisio found intuition speaking for him. “I stay
with my lord, Sire.”
He couldn't believe he'd said it, but there it was, and now both men were staring at him. King Oruen's
mouth quirked in what might have been amusement, while Scratha's expression could have melted sand
into glass. Idisio swallowed hard and tried to look sure of himself.
“Very well,” the king said, seeming to dismiss the matter.
With one last, ominous squint, Scratha let it go as well. Idisio realized he'd been holding his breath; he let
it out as quietly as possible. “Do you know what I've summoned you for, Cafad?”
“I imagine I've upset some petty courtier again.” Scratha sounded indifferent, but his hands curled into
fists.
“No,” the king said. He looked at Idisio. “Do you like my solarium, boy?” He pointed to the glass
overhead. “I saw you admiring it when you came in. It was Sessin Family's gift to me, marking their
acceptance of me as the new king in Bright Bay. They tore down the existing roof and replaced it with

Page 8

that in less than a tenday.”
Idisio glanced up again, then back to the king, confused.
“It's wonderful, Sire,” he said. “It's a marvel.”
“A marvel that could have been commonplace by now, if not for the Purge,” the king said, his gaze on the
glass star overhead. “A wonder that should have, would have been, if the madness hadn't destroyed
hundreds of years of learning. Sessin now knows more about glasscraft than anyone north of the Horn.
They're in an excellent position for trade, on that basis alone. Quite a lot of money in glass, as I
understand it. Quite a lot of tax revenue potential for the city they choose to set up their main trade shops
in. And do I need to note that this gift also marks Sessin Family as myallies ? That's not something for a
new king to take lightly, either.” He didn't lower his gaze from the ceiling as he spoke.
Scratha's face was tight as his fisted hands. “This is about Nissa.”
“LadyNissa, of Sessin Family.” The king at last turned his gaze back to Scratha. “She has some very livid
bruises, Lord Scratha, and this isn't the time of year for long sleeves.”
Cafad Scratha seemed to draw himself upright and compact, all at once.
The king said, “She claims you threw her into the street half-naked, bellowing that she was a whore.”
“It's a good name,” Scratha said. “She's Sessin.”
“She admits she should have told you,” the king said. “She was afraid of your obsession.”
“Obsession?”
“That's what it's been named,” the king said, “and I agree. The girl did nothing, by her account, that gave
cause to humiliate her like that. Can you give a good reason?”
Scratha looked mutinous. “She's Sessin. I'll have nothing to do with that family.”
“You're a fool.” The king sat down with a heavy sigh. “I have to do something about this, Cafad. I won't
alienate my strongest supporters for your pride.”
“Your strongest supporters?” Scratha said, and while his volume stayed low, his tone was anything but
mild. “Sessin's a family of cowards. Theirsupport means nothing. Less than nothing. I wouldn't let one of
their asp-jacaus near me, much less one of their women.”
If there had been any point to running, Idisio would already have been edging towards the door. He
stood very still and hoped they wouldn't notice his continuing presence.
“Iknow Sessin was involved in my family's destruction,” Scratha said, “and gods save them when I find
the proof to present to a desert court. And I will. I'll find it! And then you'll see—”
“Enough,” the king said, raising a hand. “None of the desert families had anything to do with your family's
slaughter. I won't believe such a thing, and neither should you. You're wasting your life on this. Find a
good woman, of whatever family or line. Fill your fortress with the laughter of children instead of the
wailing of ghosts.”

Page 9

Scratha stood mute and straight, a hard line to his jaw and a darkness in his eyes.
The king looked at that grim, silent refusal and slowly shook his head. “I had hoped to talk you into
apologizing to Nissa. I see that won't happen.”
“No, Lord Oruen,” Scratha said. “That will never happen.”
“Sessin isn't the only family you've upset lately, Cafad.”
“That's desert lord business, Lord Oruen, and none of yours.”
“You've brought your squabbles into Bright Bay, so it's now become my business,” the king said just as
sharply. He stood, and his tone changed to one of authority, one he might have used in front of a full
audience in his throne room. “I have a task for you, Cafad Scratha.”
Idisio could feel roses and silks rapidly fading beyond any chance of his reach. He'd be lucky to live out
his life in a dungeon alongside the man he'd foolishly claimed as lord. Twice in one day, intuition had
failed him, and each time more disastrously.
“The royal library has been decimated since the time of Initin the Red,” the king went on. “I am of a mind
to restock it. An accounting of the kingdom is sorely needed: history, current affairs, culture, religions,
beliefs, and so on. Without such a guide, I'll be hard put to pull order from the chaos I've been left.
You're a man of learning and intelligence; I place you in charge of compiling a modern history of this
kingdom. I want tales of how the last two hundred years have affected the rest of the kingdom, especially
the northern half.”
Scratha opened his mouth to speak, eyes narrowing.
The king stopped him with another imperious gesture. ”Arason is of special interest to me, but be very
careful; they're a bit touchy at the moment.“
The two men locked stares.
“Thistask of yours will take years, if I agree to do it,” Scratha said. “If.”
“You'll do this, Cafad Scratha,“ the king said. “Or lose your access to Bright Bay for the rest of your
life.”
Scratha stared, seeming more puzzled than angry, for another moment, then shrugged and gave a sharp
nod. “I'll do the job.”
The king smiled without joy and shook a small silver hand bell. At the faint tinkling sound, a servant
stepped through a side door half-hidden behind draperies, and stood, attentive and silent, waiting
instruction.
“Settle Lord Scratha and his servant in a guest room,” the king directed. “When they're ready, take them
to see the steward regarding supplies and two horses.”
“I only need one horse, Lord Oruen,” Scratha said stiffly.

Page 10

“What about your servant? Is he to run at your stirrup? Take two, and a pack-mule if you need one.”
Scratha turned a glare on Idisio.
“I don't know that I'll need a servant on this journey,” he said after a moment, turning a markedly more
polite glance to the king. “I'll move faster traveling alone, and I'm used to doing for myself. Taking this
one on was . . . a whim. I'll find another place for him, before I leave.”
Intuition prodding him hard, Idisio gave in, hoping for better results this time, and matched the desert
lord's quick recovery with his own before the king could speak.
“My lord, I'm no whim. Just the other day you said you couldn't do without me! And I really don't know
what I'd do without you.”
“Take your servant along,” the king ordered before Scratha could speak. “He'll come in handy, and he
seems devoted to you: not something to toss aside lightly.”
“Indeed,” Scratha said.
Idisio shivered at the ice held in that single word, and wondered whether he'd made a very bad mistake
after all.

The wall crashed up behind Idisio, and his breath thumped from his lungs at the impact. Idisio rolled
away from Scratha's reaching hand and scrambled to his feet. Settling into a crouch, weight on his toes,
he kept his eyes fixed on Scratha.
“Wait,” he said, knowing it wouldn't do any good. “Wait, my lord, please. . . .”
The man fairly steamed with fury. Idisio didn't think Scratha would dare to kill him, since they both had
the king's notice now, but he suspected a hefty helping of bruises for his insolence loomed in the near
future.
Idisio let the plea hang in the air and watched with intense relief as the madness slowly faded from
Scratha's eyes, leaving behind a simpler and safer version of that anger.
“I'll ask you again,” Scratha said. “Who sent you?”
What the king had said helped Idisio understand the desert lord's obsession, but made a convincing reply
no easier to craft.
“Nobody, my lord,” Idisio said. “I'm just a simple street thief. I made a mistake, trying for your pocket.”
“A nd a s asimple street thiefyou nailed yourself to my side in front of the king?” Scratha demanded.
Idisio lifted his hands in a helpless gesture. “It's a better life than scrounging half-bits for a living, my lord;
can you blame me for trying?”

Page 11

“I don't believe you.”
Idisio shrugged and straightened. “Will you take my service, my lord, or am I out on the streets again? If
I go back on the street now, after walking into the palace by your side, I'll be dead by nightfall.” An
outright lie, which was dangerous with a desert lord; but it would resonate with the man's paranoid fears.
Scratha stared at him, anger easing further, and finally said, “Very well.”
Idisio let out a very quiet sigh of relief through barely parted lips.
“Get your belongings, then, and meet me back here,” Scratha said, turning away.
Idisio thought back over his small, carefully hidden cache of possessions; nothing there worth the trip to
gather. A small dagger, a ragged shirt, a worn pair of sandals, a handful of coin that looked pitiful next to
what he hoped to make now—if Scratha intended to pay him as a servant rather than use him as a slave.
It seemed worth the risk.
“I have nothing to get, my lord.”
“Sit quietly, then.”
The noble knelt at a low wooden desk, pulled a quill, ink, and three pieces of parchment from the
shallow drawers as though he'd known they were there, and began to write. Not being able to read,
Idisio could only guess; one looked like a list, the other like a letter to someone. Judging by the frequent
pauses, a good deal of thought was going into the writing of both. The third took less time.
Idisio sank to the floor while Scratha wrote, grateful for the chance to rest. His bare feet were scuffed
and aching from walking over so much unaccustomed stone.
He normally kept to the sand and dirt paths of the city, but almost all of the trip to and through the Palace
had been on paved roads and along hard stone corridors.
“Here's your first task, then,servant ,” Scratha said at last, rolling up two of the papers, note inside the
list, and fastening a silk ribbon tightly around them. The longer letter he folded and pushed to one side.
“Go with that man waiting outside and take these to the steward. They're just supply lists and directions
on what we'll need,” he added, sounding impatient, as if Idisio had questioned him.
Idisio stood, feeling the weight on his feet as if he were made of lead more than flesh. “You're not going,
my lord?”
“No. I have other . . . tasks to do.”

The steward was a thin, sharp-faced man of no readily-apparent bloodline and a sour demeanor. He
stared at Idisio as if examining a particularly nasty bug.
“Eh . . . the servant to Lord Scratha,s'e ,” the steward's secretary murmured, then withdrew hastily.

Page 12

The disdain on the steward's face intensified.
“No surprise,” he said, not standing, “that he'd take on such as you.” He held out a thin-boned hand on
which veins looped and sprawled prominently against paper-dry skin. “Give me the list, then, don't stand
there like a fool.”
Idisio stood silent, gaze on the floor, as the steward snapped the rolls open with quick gestures.
“I see,” the steward said, his voice considerably colder than it had been. “Boy, look at me.”
Idisio raised his gaze slowly.
“Do you know what this letter says, boy?”
“No,s'e. I can't read, and my lord said nothing of it.”
“Kind of him, to send you with a handful of chaos and say nothing to you of it,” the steward said.
“Typical of him, in fact.”
He leaned back in his chair and rubbed at his eyes, seeming exasperated.
“The man's got no idea of palace politics, none at all—and not much notion of how to play his own land's
games, either. He saidnothingof this to you? Are you lying to me, boy?”
“No,s'e , I wouldn't dare.”
“I believe that, at least.” The steward sighed and stood. “Come with me. I'll send a servant along with the
supplies by the end of the day. No doubt your hasty young fool of a desert lord will want to leave first
thing in the morning. Not that I said that, mind you,” he added with a glare.
“No,s'e .S'e ?” Idisio decided to chance his customary brashness. “What did the letter say?”
“Instructions to clean you up, and no surprise. You stink.”

Cleaning him up, as it turned out, involved a thorough scrubbing by a fat old palace eunuch who only
gave over the brush when Idisio threatened to shove it somewhere unpleasant, and only retreated farther
than arm's length when satisfied that Idisio really would clean himself.
Idisio emerged feeling very raw and sour, especially when he found his old clothes gone. In their place
lay the silks he'd wished for, spread out ruby and white on the wide clothes-stool, and a pair of dark
softsoled boots. He stared at them in dismay. The outfit might be suited to court, but certainly not the
open road. He could imagine the state they'd be in after a tenday.
He suspected the steward of having a grim joke at his expense. “S'ii,” he started, turning to the eunuch to
protest, but the man had slipped from the room already. There was nothing for it but to put the clothes
on. Once dressed, Idisio stood very still, wide-eyed at howsmooth the silk felt against scrubbed-raw
skin. It felt like walking in a continual bath of cool water, and the way the fabric flowed over his body

Page 13

was heady and arousing. He swallowed hard and finally managed to subdue the reaction; it took him a bit
longer to walk across the room and back without it recurring.
A long mirror leaned against one wall; he went to it hesitantly. He'd had a chance to look in
burnished-metal mirrors, and once a real Sessin glass hand-mirror, but never his whole body at once.
Idisio knew he didn't qualify as handsome. He'd been laughed at and taunted by too many girls for that to
be a hope. What stared back at him from the glass, however, wasn't as ugly as he'd expected.
He almost had the wide face of a born southerner, but free of dirt it showed a much lighter color than
Lord Scratha's. His nose was far too snubbed to be true southerner, and his eyes, a clear bright grey,
were unusually wide and round. His hair, washed, brushed, and tied back, turned out to be a fine shade
of deep brown and as silky as the clothes he wore. His eyes shifted between grey-blue and grey-green as
he studied himself, tilting his head this way and that. Standing straight in the fine new clothes, he could
have passed for some noble's bastard down from the north.
Idisio hovered between shock and revelation: nobility weren'tborn looking one way and street-scum born
another. They were all the same. Put a noble's son in rags and run him through the sand and dust of the
back streets for a day, and he'd look like Idisio had that morning. Noble blood attracted girls. The way
he looked now, maybe they wouldn't laugh at him any more.
It took him a while more to calm himself afterthat thought.
Finally, fairly sure he wouldn't embarrass himself, he took a guess at the door he thought opened to the
hall and looked out. The eunuch sat on a wide stool just outside, and a guard stood to the other side of
the door. They both glanced at him as he stepped out.
“Much better,” the eunuch said, favoring Idisio with a faint smile.
The guard grunted, returned his attention to front, and said nothing.
“Sorry I took so long,s'ii,” Idisio said.
The eunuch's smile widened just a bit. “I understand,” he said, standing. “Back in the room, boy. I've
been asked to teach you some manners so you don't disgrace your lord at dinner tonight.”
“At. . . .” Idisio stared, suddenly horror-struck at the implication. Needing manners, not disgracing his
lord, meant he'd be at a formal dinner, a noble's dinner, more than likely with the king attending. The
notion scared him silly. “Atdinner? ”
The guard made another small noise, his mouth twitching slightly in what might have been amusement or
scorn.
“It would be rude beyond measure, as your lord is staying at the palace, not to join the king at table,” the
eunuch said calmly. “You have a bit over two hours left before the call. I expect I'll only need one.”

“Nobody knows you as a street-rat,” had been the eunuch's first piece of advice. “Don't act like one;

Page 14

nobody will peg you as one. Stand straight—that's it, like that—and say as little as you can. Better for
people to think you slow or mute than to hear that gutter accent of yours.”
Idisio stood silent at his lord's side for what seemed like hours in the before-dinner gathering, watching
the nobility and their servants flow by like an unruly river. Scratha stayed still, not quite in a corner but
with his back inches from a wall, and watched the proceedings with an expressionless face. He had
dressed in sober clothes—black trousers and soft black boots, a dark grey tunic with a high collar. Idisio
saw a thick silver band on his left thumb, stamped with what looked like a family crest, and a thin silver
chain around his throat. His long dark hair was carefully pulled back and tied with a black leather thong.
In this crowd, all in silks and riotous colors, he stood out like an axeman at a wedding, and most people
avoided him after a quick, uneasy glance his way. Idisio had the feeling that Scratha had aimed for
exactly that effect.
Idisio's boots began to chafe. His legs hurt; his back and neck ached. He couldn't wait for this to be
over. Servants didn't sit, the eunuch had told him. They stood at their lord or lady's side, hour after hour
after hour, until the dinner ended. Only then, and only if they were lucky enough to have their lord's
approval, could they go to the kitchen to scrabble over scraps.
Idisio had been unable to hide his dismay at that information. The eunuch had checked mid-sentence and
given him a hard look.
“You haven't eaten yet today, have you, boy?” he demanded, then sent a servant for a plate of food.
Crusty bread, still warm from the ovens, a wedge of fine white cheese, and thick slices of sand-pear; it
had been a feast, and only the eunuch's restraining hand kept him from tearing into it like a hungry
asp-jacau. Idisio's stomach still felt warm and full from that first lesson on eating in polite company.
Idisio looked over the before-dinner crowd with a rather benign feeling as a result, ignored his multiplying
aches, and tried to see if his lord watched anyone in particular. He couldn't see any pattern, and his own
gaze often wandered; a number of pretty girls were drifting around the room, most of them clad in thin
silks and flowing gowns. The sight caught his breath hard in his chest. He looked at the ugliest old men in
the room to calm himself.
“My lord,” he said after a while, “may I ask a question?”
“What?”
“Why did the king say Arason is of special interest right now?”
“Ghost Lake,” Scratha said, not looking down at him. “The people of Arason believe strange creatures
live in the lake, creatures that come out and seduce unwary women. The children of such a union are
supposed to have unusual powers, reading minds, seeing the future, and so on.”
“Witches,” Idisio said. Something about his lord's words sent a shiver up his back, as if there were more
to the story. Seeing the future?He won't kill me. This is a good thing happening. . . . He blinked hard and
tried not to think about whether his intuition could be considered witchcraft.
“Yes. The Church convinced Ninnic to investigate. Troops were sent to Arason to root out the witches.
It got . . . ugly. Oruen called the troops back when he took the crown, but the damage will take
generations to heal.”

Page 15

Arason is dangerous. Very, very dangerous.Idisio tried to quell the panic rising in his throat.
“Do we have to go there?” he husked.
Scratha made no reply beyond a faint smile.
They stood in silence for a time, watching the room; then the faintest of sighs came from Scratha, drawing
Idisio's attention. His lord's expression had shifted from bland to stony.
“Damn,” the noble said, just barely audible.
A tall, thin young man strode towards them, aristocratic jaw set hard and ugly. Idisio had seen him
before, moving through uptown and downtown streets with no worry over safety: Pieas Sessin didn't
need any thieves' warning passed before him to warrant caution.
Scratha shifted slightly, as if considering rapid evasion, then stilled and waited, expressionless again. Pieas
came to a halt before them, fine dark brows drawn into a fierce scowl.
“You, Lord Scratha,” he said. “I've words for you.”
“Sessin,” Scratha said, making the name sound like an insult. “I've none for you.”
Pieas's dark face flushed further. “You dishonored my sister, Scratha.”
People were beginning to turn and watch.
“Your sister?” Scratha said idly, watching the young man with the detached interest he might have shown
an unusually colored rat.
“Have you forgotten her so quickly?” Pieas's hands were clenched now, his eyes narrow. “I shouldn't be
surprised—”
Before he could say more, an older man with a similar face but broader build pushed through the
gathering crowd and clamped a hand on his shoulder.
“Pieas,” the new arrival said, and neither tone nor grip was gentle.
The rage in the young man's expression shifted to a sulky, resentful demeanor as he turned to look at the
man, who Idisio felt sure had to be Pieas's father or uncle. Pieas opened his mouth to protest, but the
words seemed to fade into silence under the man's hard stare. With a last, burning glare at Scratha, Pieas
jerked away to stomp off into the crowd, which scattered like sand in a strong wind as he passed.
“My apologies, Lord Scratha,” the man said, offering a shallow bow. “Pieas is a bit of a hothead, I'm
afraid. I warned him to stay away from you, but he listens about as well as a deaf and blind asp-jacau.”
Scratha returned the slight bow a bit stiffly, as if reluctant to offer any courtesy to the man, and said
nothing.
“I don't know what happened with my sister's daughter,” the man went on, lowering his voice and casting
a quick glance at the dispersing crowd. “I do know the girl's done nothing but cry for the past few days. I
believe she was actually quite fond of you, Lord Scratha.”

Page 16

Scratha's face twitched, brows and lips and eyes contracting for an instant, but he stayed silent, his gaze
watchful and wary now.
The man, in turn, studied Scratha in silence for a few moments, then said, “I suppose I may as well be
hanged for a turkey as for a leg. I've been troubled for years over the way my family treated you, but I
couldn't go against my Head of Family—at least, that's how I saw it when I was younger. But I've grown
up a bit since those days, and now I can say aloud what I should have said then: that I never agreed with
Lord Arit's policy, and I am truly sorry about how Sessin has treated you, Lord Scratha.” He kept his
voice low, although to his credit he didn't glance to see who else might be hearing his words.
Scratha stood still in a way that reminded Idisio of a thunderstorm about to break.
“I'm afraid I haven't met you, Lord Sessin,” he said at last.
“I'm Lord Eredion Sessin,” the man said. “Sessin's resident ambassador to the northern court. When we
last met, you were only ten. I'm not surprised you don't remember me; there was rather a lot going on at
the time.” He grinned, a bright flash of even teeth in a dark face. “I normally don't attend these dinners,
but when I saw Pieas setting out with that look on his face, I came along to keep him in hand.”
Scratha drew a deep breath and let it out slowly, staring at the man with a distant, thoughtful expression.
Eredion waited a moment longer, then said, “Don't think so harshly of all our family, Lord Scratha; some
of us are actually human.” He offered another shallow bow and smile, then took his leave, unruffled by
Scratha's silence and brooding regard.
A rattling crash of hardwood sticks on wide, hollow metal tubes hanging near one of the wide entryways
brought the crowd to hushed attention. Before the ringing tones had completely stilled, people began
moving through the doorway into the huge dining hall beyond. Idisio obediently followed Scratha, took
up a place behind his lord's chair, and tried not to look intimidated or overawed.
The gathering room had been large, but with all the people moving about Idisio hadn't noticed the size or
grandeur so much. Once everyone had settled into their seats, the dining hall was revealed as even more
tremendous. Incredible vaulted ceilings rose high overhead, painted with murals showing the triumphs and
tragedies of past kings and queens. King Ayrq, the first ruler of Bright Bay, glowered down,
unappetizingly, at the diners: a huge, fierce man towering over those around him, one booted foot on a
large pile of skulls. Another mural showed a queen with long black hair unbound and flowing around her,
beseeching the skies as if asking one of the old gods for aid, a child limp in her arms.
Idisio tried to keep his attention on his lord, but found it difficult. He'd never seen such vibrant artwork
before, and certainly never on ceilings. He'd never been in a room lit by what must have been hundreds
of fine candles, some of them taller than he could reach. More than candles brightened the room; several
alcoves brimmed with with intense columns of light from some hidden source.
A hard nudge to the ribs from the boy standing beside him jolted Idisio into realizing he'd been gawking.
Many of the other servants around the table openly grinned at him. He swallowed hard and stood a bit
straighter, resolving to keep his mind on his job for the rest of the night.
Scratha said little, despite overtures from several people seated nearby; and the king, at the other end of
the table, seemed to be ignoring the desert lord completely. Idisio had expected that Scratha, as a desert
lord, would be sitting closer to the king's hand, but Scratha seemed oblivious to the unsubtle insult.

Page 17

“My lord Scratha,” said a thin young woman seated across from the desert lord.
She was dressed in what Idisio guessed to be the high fashion of the moment. It seemed to involve a
tremendous amount of bright red chachad feathers and silver chains. Idisio thought it looked absurd, but
the girl preened as if the feathers made her a firetail bird herself and fluttered her lashes at Scratha as she
spoke.
“I'm Alyea Peysimun. Pleased to meet you. I understand you've not been seen at court for some time.”
“True,” Scratha said, not taking his attention from his food.
She waited, looking expectant; slow realization crept over her pert features like a growing storm cloud.
“Really,” she said, no longer fluttering her lashes. “My lord Scratha, I had heard you were a man of few
words; I see that's true as well.” He bit into a roasted chicken leg and said nothing. She raised an
eyebrow and a shoulder at the same time and, her smile distinctly thinner, turned her attention to the
people on her right.
“I don't blame you,” said the thin man seated to Scratha's right, quietly, leaning over just a bit to keep the
words private between them, “for not wasting words on her. She's a ninny.”
Scratha spared the man a brief, dark stare before taking another bite of the chicken leg.
“Chicken,” the man went on amiably, ignoring the lack of response. His voice acquired a conversational
level. “I don't care for it much. I will say this for Ninnic; he knew how to set a table. Gerho at every meal,
prepared in every imaginable way. Grilled, steamed, braised, fried; oh, that man knew good food, or at
least his chefs did. Oruen's no gourmet.” He flicked a finger at the plate in front of him. “Good enough,”
he noted with a shrug, “but I do miss gerho.”
Idisio repressed a shudder. Marsh lizard had always been the food of last desperation for him, but all he
had ever sampled was the stringy version available to anyone with the skill to set a small trap. Still, that
was the first kind word he'd ever heard about the previous king.He served good lizard : what an epitaph
for a mad ruler. Idisio held back a snort of nervous laughter.
“Do you like a properly cooked platter of gerho, my lord?” the man asked against Scratha's continuing
silence.
“Yes.”
Icy premonition scrabbled like a wet rat down Idisio's back:Gerho. Something about gerho . . . is that
going to be important? He grimaced and pushed the uneasy worry to the back of his mind. He was
having more intuitive flashes today than he'd experienced in the past four tendays, and he didn't care for it
one bit.
“It's a shame for the merchants that King Oruen can't stand it,” the man rattled on. “I understand some of
them are rather put out financially; the market held quite favorable just before Ninnic had his unfortunate
accident.”
Idisio held his face as expressionless as possible. So that pleasantry covered Ninnic's death among the
nobility? An unfortunate accident? The streets called it murder, and born of treason, but always in the

Page 18

tones of fact, not complaint.Nobody sane honestly missed Ninnic. Oruen had been marked as a hero the
day he took the throne, from the lowest gutter to the highest table in the city.
The talkative man rattled on for a few moments about gerho prices, market collapses, and despairing
merchants. “There's one man in particular, invested too heavily, been haunting the palace trying to
convince the king to change his mind. I believe he's only just left a few days ago. Lashnar . . . yes, Asti
Lashnar, that's his name. Have you ever met him?”
Scratha dropped the bare bone on his platter and reached for a piece of bread from the basket in front of
him. He made no reply.
The man sighed. “Lord Scratha,” he said, “you really ought to learn at least the basics of social
convention, you know.”
Scratha set the bread on his plate and turned his gaze to the man beside him. “Why? It's all chattering
nonsense. I won't waste my breath on it.”
“Suit yourself,” the thin man said, and turned his attention to people who were interested in chattering
nonsense.
By the time the last platter of desert-honey pastries had been cleared from the table, the afternoon snack
seemed like days ago. Idisio found himself impatient to get to the kitchen and grab the remaining scraps
of the glorious dishes he'd been seeing and smelling all evening.
But with a motion of his hand, Scratha called his attention.
“Stay with me,” the noble said when Idisio bent to see what his lord wanted. The king rose to take his
leave, and the whole room stood, everyone bowing deeply. As the nobles drifted to the surrounding
gardens and social-rooms, Scratha laid a hand on Idisio's shoulder and steered him in a different
direction.
They walked through hallways and around corners, turning this way and that, seeming to go in circles,
until Idisio once again conceded himself lost. At last he saw a familiar portrait. Confirming his guess, they
paused before an unremarkable grey door.
“Yes, you're expected,” one of the guards said, deadpan, and once again they walked through the door
into the presence of King Oruen.
The royal robes of public appearance were draped almost carelessly over the back of the king's chair.
The king, now simply a thin, gangly man in breeches and tunic, half-slouched in his chair, looked up as
they entered and pointed silently to seats. Without protest this time, Scratha sank into one and motioned
Idisio into another.
“Lord Oruen,” Scratha said. “Once again, I am here at your summons.”
“And once again,” the king said, “I'm holding back an urge to throttle you, Cafad.” He held up a sheet of
parchment that showed signs of having been crumpled and carefully smoothed back out. “What are you
trying to do to me?”
“You benefit from this arrangement, Lord Oruen.”

Page 19

The king looked at the letter again, shaking his head slowly. “The desert families will have a collective
stroke when they hear of this.”
“Let them twitch,” Scratha said. “Your steward already has a brief version of the letter in your hand. No
doubt he'll spread the word before the news loses its value.”
The king's gaze sharpened into a glare.
“You're a fool,” he said, then: “No, you're not. You've made it impossible for me to refuse. Nobody will
believe that I turned this offer down.Damn you, Cafad!”
Scratha's only answer was a shrug, hands spread wide.
“What did you put in the steward's note?” the king demanded.
“That I ceded you stewardship of my lands while I am working off your displeasure,” Scratha said,
emotionless. “Nothing more. The name change I put to you alone.”
Idisio tried not to choke audibly. Adesert lord was giving anorthern kingauthority over his entire holding?
Collective stroke would be a mild reaction, under Idisio's admittedly limited understanding of southern
politics. And as much, if not more, ire would be directed at the king for accepting as at Scratha for
offering such a thing.
But the king was right: nobody would believe he had turned down such an opportunity.
The king stared at Scratha for a while, fingers nervously working the edges of the note in his hand as if he
longed to rip it to bits.
“Very well, then,” he said at last. “I accept. I'll guard your lands from intrusion while you're gone. You do
realize the implications of your offer?”
“I do.”
“As for the name change—are you sure you want to do that?”
“I can't very well collect history, observe culture, and send useful reports if the people I speak to are
busy fawning on or fearing me as a desert lord,” Scratha said. “It'll be hard enough, in the northlands, for
me to pass at all without being attacked. I'll probably be relying on my servant in some areas.”
Idisio did choke this time. Up to this moment, he hadn't considered anything of his role beyond a hazy
supposition that he'd be tending to Scratha's horse, cooking him supper, mending and cleaning his
clothes. Not that he knew how to do any of those things, but he'd figured it would all be easy enough to
pick up along the way.
His strangling noise drew a brief, amused glance from the king. “I see you haven't mentioned that idea to
your servant yet.”
“There hasn't been time,” Scratha said.
“At least you took time to clean him up before dinner. I'm grateful for that. And I hope you've also taken
the time to caution your young thief against stealing anything while on palace grounds.”

Page 20

In the following silence, Idisio could feel all color draining from his face, and Scratha looked completely
at a loss for words.
The king managed a tired smile. “I'd be a fool if I didn't inquire about a servant that looked as if he'd
been picked up straight from the dustier streets of Bright Bay just before arriving—especially as you've
never taken a servant before, Cafad. I thought you understood by now that I'm not a fool.”
“Indeed,” Scratha said. “My apologies, Lord Oruen. I seem to have forgotten.”
“You're not the only one that forgets.” The king sighed. “Why, if I may ask, that choice of name?”
“Gerau was mys'enetan 's name,” Scratha said.
The king nodded. “Honoring your grandfather's memory, I can understand,” he said. “And— forgive
me—sa'adenit? I know you're no fool yourself, but don't you means'e deaneat , son of a desert family?”
Scratha looked grim. “I said what I meant.”
“There aren't many who understand the old languages anymore,” the king said. “Most people won't
know what you mean.”
“All the better,” Scratha said. “Anyone who understands that word is dangerous.”
Idisio had held his silence for too long. Questions were crowding in his throat, becoming painful. He burst
out, “My lord, Sire—what does it mean?”
“Ah,” the king said, smiling again as his gaze shifted to Idisio. “This one, at least, is safely ignorant, if there
is any such thing.”
Scratha shook his head, brooding, and said nothing.
“What does it mean?” Idisio repeated.
The king answered, as Scratha sat silent. “It translates to 'Blood on the Sand.' Thesa'a at the beginning
marks it as matrilineal, where a line run by male parentage would call itse'edenit . It comes from an old
verse. I learned it as a child, but I probably received a poor translation. Here's best I can recall.” He
began to chant in a hoarse voice:
When the desert sleeps
It does not forget its secrets
It does not forgive the blood
The blood that was shed without cause.
Stone grows cold and flowers close
But the desert remembers the warmth of life
The warmth of the blood as it fell to the sand.
The blood on the sand may disappear
But the desert does not forgive the death.
With the sun's awakening the blood flows fresh
And the killer is damned by the desert
Because the desert does not forget

Page 21

And the desert will never forgive.
The king paused, then repeated softly, “'The desert will never forgive.' That verse always gave me
chills.”
Idisio nodded fervently in agreement, goose bumps running up and down his spine.
“Thatwas a poor translation,” Scratha said. He had crossed his arms during the recital, and still looked
distinctly displeased. “It's much longer than that, and more explicit. Northerns like to water everything
down. But that version serves the point.”
“It's a call for vengeance,” the king said quietly, his gaze fixed on the desert lord. “A thoroughly ugly call,
at that, when it's translated without what you call 'watering down' the words.”
“I will find the hand behind my family's slaughter,” Scratha said, equally soft and calm, but madness
flickered in his eyes again. “I will have their blood in equal measure. Never think I'm giving that up,
however far you send me. Who knows, maybe the northlands will have clues I couldn't find in the south.
Stranger things have happened in this world.”
The king opened his mouth, checked, then sighed. “King's Researcher Gerau Sa'adenit it is, then. I really
hope you've thought this out, Cafad.”
“I have,” Scratha said, and stood. With two long steps he loomed over the king; then he knelt and held
out his hand, palm up, offering a heavy silver ring with what looked like a family sigil stamped on the face.
Oruen stared at it for a moment, as if the desert lord were offering poison; then he reached out and
picked the ring gingerly from Scratha's palm. “I'll tell people you've gone to the Stone Islands,” he said,
not taking his gaze from the ring. “At least I can give you that much protection against gossip.”
“As you wish,” the desert lord said, sounding supremely indifferent, then stood, retreating as swiftly as he
had advanced. “May we retire, Lord Oruen?”
The king waved a weary assent, sinking further into his chair. The last glance Idisio had of the king
showed a deeply worried expression and a note once again crumpled between royal hands.

They didn't return to their room, as Idisio had expected. Instead, his lord guided him through another
seemingly endless march. They turned and twisted through various hallways, climbing a shallow flight of
steps and then descending, several changes of direction later, a rather longer set of stairs.
The air grew noticeably damp, and Idisio put his arm over his nose to ward against the increasing tang of
mold and mildew. The space between the guttering wall sconces grew until islands of light lay ahead and
behind while they walked in darkness. The hallway narrowed, too; eventually Idisio could put his hands
out to either side and feel the walls. And then the passage tightened further, until he could extend no more
than elbows.
Finally there were no more torches ahead: only cold, unbroken silence and empty, dark, stinking air.

Page 22

“My lord?” Idisio ventured, voice just above a whisper, hoping his growing panic wouldn't show in the
low tone. This place feltfoul; although no smell of blood or refuse registered in his nose, an itching nausea
seemed to lurk in the very air.
Something badhappened here. Lots of bad things.
Idisio felt as though the dead crowded close, their slimy hands caressing his arms and back and legs.
The noble made a low shushing noise and went on, his feet making no noise on the pitted rock that had
long ago replaced smooth stone underfoot. Idisio drew breath, cursing himself for a fool, and followed,
one hand out to avoid running into his lord from behind.
And then somethingstirred, something deep and wild and formless; there came a shriek that had no sound
and a moment of grey eyes staring desperately into his own. Scratha's hand, latching onto his wrist,
jerked him back to the moment and almost brought the held scream from Idisio's throat. With a faint
whimper, he followed the man's tug to the left.
To Idisio's intense relief, the feeling of foulness faded with each step they took. Scratha walked behind
him from that point on, steering with one hand on Idisio's shoulder. Every so often Scratha tugged him to
a brief halt, nudged a little faster, or turned this way or that, all in complete darkness. At times Scratha
reached to touch, push, or pull something hidden, provoking muted clicks or distant grinding noises.
The floor finally sloped sharply upwards, and the air freshened, feathering Idisio's hair. The darkness
became that of an open, cloudy sky on a moonless night.
“Wait here,” Scratha said in a low voice, and slipped back into the passage.
Idisio stood still, trembling with relief, and stretched his arms out full in all directions, just to prove to
himself that he could. Returning, Scratha made an odd noise that might have been amusement and nudged
Idisio's shoulder.
“Come on. We've a walk yet.”
Idisio couldn't hold back a groan. More walking sounded as welcome as an asp-kiss.
“Where are we going, my lord?”
“We're leaving. I've arranged everything to be left at a safe spot not far from here. And don't call meLord
any more. I'm Gerau Sa'adenit, Master Gerau to you, now.”
“What happened to first thing in the morning?” Idisio muttered.
Behind them, the Bright Bay Watch-Tower bells sounded the midnight hour. Idisio cast an aggrieved
glare towards the sound and stomped after his new master.

Page 23

Chapter Two
In her dreams, Alyea danced.
Not the stately movements of the court waltzes and pavanes, not even the wilder peasant dances she'd
secretly attended from time to time. She could find a partner for those anytime she liked, these days.
But her dreams had long been the only place she could safely danceaqeyva , the only place it was safe to
hate thes'iopes —the priests of the Northern Church. Even now, as the city slowly settled back into
unaccustomed sanity, she found herself reluctant to find another teacher and take up the training that had
ended, once before, in such bloody horror.
Her feet slid across the sand and chalky grit which Ethu insisted on scattering over his training floor.
Sweet strain shook through her muscles as she leaned forward on her right leg, lifting the left high, higher,
and up! above her head, fingers brushing the ground—not into a flip, not this time, although she'd
mastered that long ago—and back down, turning, drawing in close, closer, and straightening to stand
solidly on both callused feet again.
The calluses were the despair of Alyea's maids. She wouldn't let them smooth her feet; she liked the feel
of rough skin scraping against stone and grit. She smiled, sliding the hardened heel of one foot up against
the calf of the other, just to feel the difference in texture—and the dream changed.
She was back atthat day , in the public square, tied to a chest-high post, sweat stinging the cuts and
bruises from her training sessions: wrists bound to a hook near groin level, the bindings forcing her
shoulders forward and down, arms wrapped around the post in an obscene parody of an embrace. Two
s'iopes in brown and white linen garments tied Ethu to a post beside her.
“No tears,” Ethu hissed.
Alyea's stomach turned over. A scream wanted to emerge from her mouth, but her throat refused to
make a sound. This was a dream: she had to escape it; but events moved on inexorably.
A gold-robed s'iope stepped in front of her: Rosin Weatherweaver, the head of the Bright Bay Northern
Church, faithful advisor to King Ninnic and a thoroughly evil bastard all around. His eyes glittered as he
intoned her crimes: “You come before us accused of heresy against the gods, rebellion against not only
the gods but their earthly representatives and the king himself; you have performed acts forbidden to
women, committed sacrilege in the sight of gods and men alike. . . .”
It went on for some time. Weatherweaver repeated the offenses in several different ways, managing to
make it sound as though she had committed an entire host of depravities. The crowd seemed to breathe
as one, a slavering entity intent on blood and tears; among them, her mother swayed, white-faced and
horrified, more afraid and ashamed than Alyea would ever be.
Weatherweaver's voice rolled on, seemingly unstoppable. “—deceit against your guardians, sacrilege
against the laws of gods and men—” Sweat slicking what clothes they'd left her, sand grating under her
bare feet, Alyea wished he'd just get it over with already.
At last he came to his offer:
“Publicly repent your sin and swear devotion to the Four Gods undying, or to go into death a heretic,

Page 24

casting your family into shame for ten generations to come. And if you choose heresy your family will be
given punishment as well, to ensure the lesson is never lost.”
Her mother moaned, face whiter than bleached sand, and sagged in the grip of the two s'iopes holding
her.
Alyea opened her mouth, but before she could make a sound, Weatherweaver snatched two whips from
one of the nearby s'iopes and leapt to stand behind her.
The first blow shredded her breath and her voice; the second and third loosed her bladder and bowels, a
small humiliation in the face of the moment. But she didn't scream. She didn't cry. She hung on to Ethu's
command like a lifeline, determined not to give them the satisfaction. A long, awful pause; she began to
draw in breath to speak, but just as her lips moved to form a word the fourth blow came, driving all
thought and courage from her mind. She crumbled, unable to stand another stroke. Forcing breath,
forcing words, she husked, “No more. Please. Repent. I repent.”
Weatherweaver came around to stand before her, leering as he leaned forward.
“What's that?” he whispered. His eyes glittered. “You want your mother to go through this too?” The
whips in his hands dripped with her blood.
Her mother swayed, face even whiter than before, and let out another low moan.
“Repent,” she tried to scream; it came out as a hoarse croak, but loud enough, thankfully, for nearby ears
to hear.
“Louder,” demanded a lesser s'iope; Alyea noticed, with surprising clarity, that the priest's hands had
crumpled sweaty wrinkles into the front of his formerly immaculate brown and white shirt.
Weatherweaver shot him a hard glare, then straightened, his expression sour and disappointed, as the
junior priest repeated, his own volume rising defiantly, “Say it louder, so all can hear.”
“Repent. I repent.” She didn't—couldn't stand to—look at Ethu as she spoke. “I repent my sins. I swear
undying devotion. I swear.”
They made her repeat it again, and once more, each time louder, until her voice finally gave out.
“Enough,” the junior s'iope said at last, casting a nervous glance at Rosin Weatherweaver's glowering
expression. “We accept your repentance. Now—”
Weatherweaver's eyes brightened. “Five more, I think,” he purred. “To make sure she doesn't forget.”
“I don't think that's—” the other s'iope began, but Weatherweaver was already moving.
Alyea lost track of sound. She drifted through a white, orange, and yellow tunnel of agony, hanging on to
Ethu's command with everything she had.No tears. It was all she had left.
At last her bonds loosed and hands tugged her to stand in front of Ethu.
Weatherweaver loomed up in her peripheral vision, a wild gleam in his eyes, whips still in his hands.
“Your words have condemned this man as guilty,” he declared loudly. Then, lowering his voice, he added
in her ear, “Persuade him to repent. Death can be fast for him if he repents.”

Page 25

She stared at Ethu. He looked back at her, eyes blacker than black and face stony as a mountain. He
said only, “No tears.”
That moment was the closest she came to losing control.
Ethu looked straight at Rosin Weatherweaver and told him to do something anatomically impossible and
thoroughly obscene, elaborating loudly on that theme even as the blows began.
Alyea woke screaming, as she always did, the image of Ethu's bulging eyes and bloody, bitten lips seared
into her mind. He hadn't screamed, not once; not when they threw buckets of salt water over him, not
even when bone began to show through the cuts on his back.
She shook in the darkness, bathed in sweat but freezing with remembered terror, and nobody came to
comfort her.

Scarcely any s'iopes remained in Bright Bay. Alyea had made Oruen promise to get rid of every single
one if he gained the throne, and he'd held to his word. Most had left months ago, trundling out the eastern
gates in fours and eights and sixteens: headed east to Salt Road or north through the Great Forest,
returning to their legally acknowledged holdings. One small, stubborn band of holdouts had built a group
of cottages at the western edge of the city, and for some reason Oruen allowed them that space; but they
kept to themselves, and Alyea was content to let them be if they stayed out of her sight.
The Audience Hall in which the priests had dispensed their notion of justice through a mad, puppet king
had been destroyed, and a new one was being built. But more petitioners filled the ballroom that served
as temporary Audience Hall than ever before: an untidy line of supplicants, ranging from rich to poor,
mostly southern but quite a few from north of the Great Forest. Today there was even a desert lord. Not
as unusual as it had been under Ninnic, but still rare enough to send an excited buzz through the court and
prompt everyone to crowd in, just a little, to hear the conversation.
Curious to see if it was Lord Scratha—the man could chill a fire to ice in seconds, and an audience
between him and Oruen would be something to see—Alyea pushed and slid though the crowd, gathering
more than a few sharp glares along the way, until she could see the desert lord clearly.
From where she stood, his back was to her, and his voice didn't sound familiar. She leaned to one side
as a large woman, shifting restlessly, moved into her line of sight. There was no visible insignia on the
desert lord's clothing of blue and sand-tan, but those weren't Scratha colors in any case. A wide, beaded
band covered the man's right forearm from the wrist nearly to the elbow, but he stood too far away for
Alyea to make out any distinct patterns or colors.
Alyea heard the Hall steward begin to announce someone's arrival just as the large woman stepped
directly back and stumbled against her. In the resulting fuss of sharp words and apologies, she lost her
chance to hear the identity of the new arrival. It had to be someone important, or the steward wouldn't
have bothered calling out the name; and the reaction of the crowd around her suggested it wasn't
someone particularly well liked.
She managed to catch a glimpse of the desert lord; he had turned to look towards the approaching

Page 26

newcomer. Even seeing his face clearly, she couldn't place him, but the man striding towards the throne
was much younger—and she recognized him instantly: Pieas Sessin.
Alyea would never forget his face pressed close, his breath foul with wine and drugs; would never forget
the pain, never forgive the humiliation which had led, in the end, to Ethu's death. Not that Pieas Sessin
likely knew about that, or even cared.
Nausea thickened her throat, along with a wild desire to call out his crimes; but she couldn't do it. Not in
front of Oruen. Never in front of Oruen. She'd promised herself that much, long ago.
As Pieas passed, arrogant in emerald green and sand-tan, the normal low chatter of the Audience Hall
ceased completely. Even the most witless courtiers edged away as he passed. In the complete stillness of
the room, his voice carried clearly:
“S'a-keEredion,” Pieas said, cold and deliberate, using the familiarmother's-brother rather than the formal
s'a-ketan ; a subtle insult all its own in this highly formal setting. “You neglected to inform me you had
secured an appointment with the king.”
Turning, he added, “Lord Oruen,” while dropping a just-adequate bow to the man on the throne. “I offer
my apologies for my late arrival. Please continue.”
He straightened further, tucking his strong hands behind his back, then stood silent, poised like a desert
hawk about to plunge. His arms, neck, and ears were all completely bare of ornamentation: another
insult, implying that Oruen wasn't important enough to warrant such a display.
Eredion Sessin took a deep breath. “As I was saying, Lord Oruen—” The desert lord's clear voice
carried in the continued stillness. “The next shipment of glass is well on its way to being completed.”
Thatwasn't , Alyea knew after a swift examination of Oruen's face, what they had been discussing before
Pieas swept into the room. Nice try, but it wouldn't hold; too many others had heard the discussion and
not all of them could hide their surprise.
Pieas turned his head, his sharp eyes obviously picking up the slight start here and twitch there that spoke
volumes about the lie presented.
“S'a-ketan,” he said, the formal term now even more of an insult, somehow, than the informal had been
moments ago. “Surely we aren't wasting our lord's time with servant's talk? I had thought we asked for
this audience to press our complaint against Scratha.”
Eredion's chin lowered, and his shoulders rounded forward as he turned a stare that could have melted
glass on his nephew. “Surely you don't intend to tell me what I may and may not discuss,s'ai-keia.” While
his tone stayed mild, the threat—underlined by a word one would use to a sister's son still in drooling
infancy—was unmistakable.
“Of course not,s'a-ketan ,” Pieas said humbly, apparently backing down, to the extent of physically
retreating a step. “Please forgive me.”
But the damage had been done. Complaint against Scratha? Those words had exploded a susurrus of
murmurs across the room. Alyea dearly wished she'd arrived sooner, secured a better view, caught even
a bit of the earlier conversation. They'd probably been discussing, in careful, sideways terms, the very
thing on which Pieas had demanded public attention.

Page 27

Eredion Sessin looked ready to take the man to pieces with his bare hands.
Oruen shook his head slowly. “I assume this is about Nissa? If so, I should tell you that I spoke to your
sister before she left for Sessin. I also summoned Lord Scratha. And I have already settled the matter to
my own satisfaction. Lord Eredion, just before you arrived,had agreed to wait on a more private
audience to discuss it further, later in the day. You may attend that discussion, if you wish.” His flat stare
dared Pieas to protest further.
“Yes, Lord Oruen,” Pieas said. Alyea thought some of the humility in his voice might be real this time; the
man looked badly rattled.
Eredion spoke, his voice and hands tight: “We beg your leave to withdraw, Lord Oruen.”
At Oruen's weary nod, Eredion dropped a deep and profoundly apologetic bow, gripped his nephew's
elbow in what looked to be an iron hold, and hustled him from the room.
Intrigued, hoping to see Pieas receive a serious scolding, Alyea wormed her way back through the crowd
and followed them. She slipped into the secret passageways and, undetected, watched them from hidden
posts as they returned to their rooms.
Their private quarters were one of the few with multiple watch-holes, but only one other watcher was in
place when Alyea arrived. She recognized the lean face and dark eyes of a man who had seen, if reports
were true, three kings come and go. Not that Ninnic and Mezarak had lasted their full natural lifespans;
but still, it spoke of capability. She didn't know his true name. The Hidden Cadre left all prior identity
behind when they entered royal service. His call-name was a word from the old language:micru , the
black and tan-banded viper that moved faster than thought and could kill a healthy draft-horse.
Micru gave her a swift and disinterested glance as she slid into the spying area, then put a finger over his
mouth in a wordless warning:be silent and you may stay.
She nodded, agreeing, and peered through one of the spyholes. She found the two men speaking quietly,
not shouting as she would have expected. Even with her good hearing, she had to strain for their words.
For a long, annoying time, she caught only a fragment or an occasional word, not enough to make out
what they were discussing. A glance at Micru showed him sitting perfectly still, intent, eyes half-closed as
he listened. Alyea guessed he could read lips, and wished she had been able to pick up that skill; but her
feeble attempts at it had always been disastrous.
After a while, Pieas stormed out of the room. Micru didn't move, his attention fixed on Eredion; she
stayed, wondering what he was watching for now. It finally occurred to her that he'd be sitting here for
hours; Micru was posted to watch the room, not Pieas.
She was being an idiot, and her presence was useless. No matter how adept she was at sneaking through
secret passages and moving quietly, she was no palace spy and never would be.
The admission galled.
So did Micru's brief, amused glance as she slid past him on her way out of the passage.
Just tired enough to want to avoid chance encounters with ambitious nobles and courtiers, Alyea chose a
little-used passage back to her rooms. While her family had a small estate within the Seventeen Gates,

Page 28

Oruen had set aside a small suite of rooms for Alyea within the palace itself, and she stayed there more
often than not. Her mother never complained, more than content that her only daughter should remain as
close as possible to the king. Alyea had given up trying to convince her mother that Oruen would never
offer marriage. Once that woman got an idea, a mountain of sand couldn't smother it.
Swinging around a corner, she stopped, startled.
Alyea didn't know all the servants, but she did recognize the simple ruby-and-silver ring visible on this
girl's right hand as she struggled with the man pinning her against the wall. Along with the long dark hair
and a scar on the back of the girl’s right hand, it served as positive identification: Alyea had given that ring
to her favorite maid before dismissing her years ago.
Alyea pulled the man away and shoved him staggering sideways before he had time to react to her
presence.
“Stand off,s'e !” she barked.
“How dare you!” he shouted simultaneously, catching himself against the wall.
The man out of the way for the moment, Alyea turned to the servant girl. “Wian, are you hurt?”
A livid bruise shadowed the side of Wian's face, and her simple servant's dress was in disarray. “I'll
survive, my lady,” she said, sagging back against the wall with one hand to her throat. “Thank you.”
“Howdare you!” the man raged, straightening and advancing a step; and at last the voice registered as
familiar.
Alyea turned to stare at the man. Pieas Sessin—again! For a moment she didn't know what to say, and
Pieas seemed to be searching for a suitably harsh reprimand. He obviously didn't recognize her; just as
well.
“How dare you?” Pieas repeated, moving another stride closer. “This is none of your concern!”
“She's not willing, so it certainly is my concern.” Her anger, now back in full force, burst loose. “You
have no right to take any servant inside the Seventeen Gates against her will!”
“She's willing enough to have lured me here,” Pieas said, arrogant in certainty. “Any cry of rape would be
a lie; she almost dragged me with her.”
Alyea stared at the man in disbelief. She didn't need Wian's pale, frantic head-shake to know Pieas lied.
“And the bruise?” she demanded. “And her struggle to be free? Do you take me for a complete fool?”
“She only fought when she heard your step,” he said smoothly. “And the bruise was there before she
flung herself at me. She can't cry rape just because she's embarrassed at being caught!”
“She doesn't need to; I know her, and you, andI call it rape. Stay away from her and the other servants,
or I'll see you barred from setting foot inside the Gates.”
“You have no such authority,” he said, laughing at her now. “Cry all you want. I'll let the little whore go;
there are others more interesting.” He turned to leave.

Page 29

“You're a fine champion for your sister, Pieas Sessin,” she snapped.
He stopped and turned with shocking speed and grace, looming over her before she had time to draw a
breath. “Don't you dare compare my sister to some palace whore!”
“Wian isn't a whore,” Alyea said, “and neither was I.”
“What, you've known me as well?” he asked, almost laughing again, then stopped, searching her face
more carefully. A faint frown creased his forehead, and he began to speak.
She cut him off. “Go away, get out of the Palace, Pieas, before I call the guards to escort you out!”
His frown shifted to a sneer. “Go on, call them! They can't touch me. Desert Family immunity, in case
you've forgotten your lessons.” He cast the maid a thoughtful glance that sent ice down Alyea's back, and
sauntered away, whistling loudly.
“Gods,” Alyea muttered. She turned quickly to her former servant. Wian had sunk to the floor, head on
her knees, breathing in great, wobbly gasps. “Wian, come, let's get you back to Lady Arnil's.”
“I didn't encourage him,” Wian said shakily, “I swear, I didn't. He followed me all evening, and I was
trying to avoid him, I know his kind, I know that look, and I thought I was safe, cutting down this
hallway, and didn't know he followed me. . . .”
She started to cry, shivering, her eyes wide and dilated with shock.
“Hush, Wian,” Alyea said, gathering the terrified girl into a tight hug before tugging her back to her feet. “I
know. Believe me, I know.”

“Pieas Sessin?” Lady Arnil shook her head. “No, I don't think I've heard of him before.”
Lady Arnil, Alyea thought, lived a sheltered and deliberately ignorant life; her home just barely qualified
as within Bright Bay boundaries. Her late husband had kept his frail wife there for the same reason Alyea
originally sent Wian to the lady: as protection against the gross excesses of the last king.
While she'd dismissed all her servants after Ethu's death, convinced one of them had betrayed her to
Rosin Weatherweaver, she'd done her best to arrange good homes for all of them. Wian, her most
devoted servant, she'd been extra careful to place in a safe spot, far from danger. She hadn't known, at
the time, Lady Arnil's temperament: arrogant, selfish, and even more obsessed with status and propriety
than Alyea's own mother. A safe home for Wian, yes; but not, unfortunately, a kind one.
But Alyea didn't say any of that aloud. What she did say, after a carefully measured breath for patience,
was: “He's an unkind person, my lady. And Wian's run across his worst side. She's in danger.”
“How can that be?” The woman squinted at Alyea, seeming honestly puzzled. “We'll simply keep her
within the house until he leaves Bright Bay. For that matter, what in the world were you doing in the
palace, Wian? You weren't given leave to go anywhere—”
Afraid of the conversation sidetracking, Alyea didn't wait for an answer. “My lady, Wian's in danger so
long as she stays in the city. I suggest sending her away until Pieas has had enough time to forget about

Page 30

this incident.”
“This incident,” Lady Arnil repeated, and peered shortsightedly at the silent maid standing beside Alyea.
“You say this man trapped you in a back hallway of the palace—”
“Time is short,” Alyea said, her patience thinning. “Take my word for it, Lady Arnil. Youhave to send her
away to a place Pieas has no influence—”
“Don't you tell me what I must do,” Lady Arnil said, her tone sharpening. “You're barely above a girl
yourself!”
“I'm sorry, my lady,” Alyea said quickly. “I misspoke—”
“Indeed you did,” Lady Arnil said stiffly, and stood. “You may go, young lady. Wian will stay here, and
stay within the house walls for a while; that may teach her a lesson about wandering about without
permission.”
“But, my lady—”
“You maygo .”
Seeing no point in further arguing, Alyea grimaced and turned to leave. She paused to embrace Wian on
her way out, and whispered: “I'll find a way to get you out of the city, if you want.”
“It's all right,” Wian murmured. “I'm honored by your care, my lady, but I'll do as Lady Arnil says. I'm
sure she's right. I'll be safe here.”
Alyea shook her head, but under Lady Arnil’s fierce glare had no room for protest. “Take care of
yourself,” she said at normal volume, and left feeling that she had betrayed Wian's trust.
By the time she got back to the palace, the hallways had grown relatively quiet with the advancing night
hours. She paused at the passage leading to her rooms. She badly wanted a long, hot soak in a
lavenderscented tub, and a light platter of fruit. Her stomach rumbled and her legs ached from the long
walk, but the desire to talk to Oruen about the gross injustice of Pieas's behavior being protected by
diplomatic immunity was too strong. She hurried onward.
Rounding a corner, she almost ran into a servant; he reached to tug anxiously at her sleeve as she
detoured around him.
“Lady,” he said. “Lady Alyea? The King calls you to attend him. A conference, he said, and for you to
hurry.”
Alyea stopped on the spot, staring at the servant: he was buck-toothed and gangly, his face heavily
scarred with adolescent acne. He showed only relief at having found her.
“A conference?”
“That's what he said, Lady, and for you to hurry.”
Conferences involved more than two people. “Do you know who else is with him?”

Page 31

“The lords Sessin, I think.”
“Thank you,” she said, dismissing him. He scurried away, and she paused for a moment's thought before
continuing. Pieas must have run straight to Oruen to complain, no doubt twisting the matter to her
disadvantage. Her step quickened along with her temper. She vowed that by the time she was done,
Pieas would be lucky to walk out unbruised himself.
The guards at the small grey door nodded silently and opened the door without even the flicker of a
smile. The room beyond was quiet as she stepped through; she heard the door snick softly shut behind
her. She paused a moment, studying the two Sessins—who were, as she'd expected, sitting stiff and grim
on padded chairs across from the king.
With a few long strides, she covered more than half the distance to Oruen's chair. “My lord King Oruen,”
she said, dropped to one knee, then rose. She kept her gaze directly on his face, her expression carefully
inquiring. “You sent for me?”
His dark eyes narrowed. She could see him considering both her formal address in what he referred to as
his “casual room” and her ostentatious indifference to Pieas and Eredion.
Offended anger nearly steamed from the two to her left. Sessin Family always had been rigid sticklers for
propriety, and her refusal to greet them directly qualified as insulting by even the loosest standard.
“I did,” Oruen said at last, and pointed to a chair. “Sit, please, Alyea.”
She held back a smile at having gotten away with the insult and sank into a chair, keeping Eredion
between herself and Pieas.
“Pieas and Eredion Sessin, Alyea Peysimun,” Oruen said, making the introductions with a sweeping
gesture.
Alyea looked to the two Sessins and inclined her head graciously. Pieas's smile was strained and his glare
murderous, while to her surprise Eredion actually seemed amused. Could a Sessin have a true sense of
humor, to the extent of laughing at himself and his own kin?The sea, Alyea thought,may be about to
swallow us all .
The king settled into the wide, thick-armed chair he favored, and studied them all for a moment. “Alyea,”
he said finally, “you've heard of Cafad Scratha?”
She blinked at him, caught off guard. Then she remembered the earlier court audience and cursed herself
for a fool; this meeting had nothing to do with herself or Wian. “Of course.”
Eredion's smile faded. “Lord Oruen, I don't understand the need for her presence.”
“You will in a moment,” Oruen said, relaxed and sure of himself now. “Alyea, as you may have heard by
now, Pieas brought up a formal complaint against Scratha in my court this afternoon.”
Alyea nodded without speaking, tilting her head, expression politely curious.
“And if you heard of the complaint, you likely heard the cause,” the king prompted.
“Scratha offered insult of some sort to Pieas's sister, Nissa,” Alyea said.

Page 32

“This is a desert family matter,” Pieas said sharply. Eredion's hand clamped down on the young man's
arm, warning; the younger Sessin now wore a thin bracelet of gold and green beads on his left arm,
arranged asymmetrically on fine silver wire. She squinted at the pattern, unsure what it meant.
“As is my right,” Pieas continued as if his uncle hadn't moved, “I ask that she be removed as having no
bearing on the matter at hand. Whatever you called her to . . .discuss . . . . ”
Eredion removed his hand as abruptly as he had moved it before, expression suddenly stony. Alyea's
ears burned at the crude implication.
“—Can surely be done later, afterour business is concluded.”
Eredion reached out, not even looking, and flicked Pieas's thin bracelet hard, as though to draw attention
to it. Glass beads clicked and bumped against each other. Pieas turned a hard glare on Eredion; his elder
ignored him, while the king's eyes narrowed briefly.
“Lord Eredion?” Oruen said, apparently choosing to ignore the insult himself. “You're a full desert lord,
and the right he refers to is your prerogative, not his.”
Pieas's scowl deepened. He covered the bracelet with his other hand and sat back into his chair, chin to
chest, glaring sideways at his uncle.
“I have no objection to the girl staying,” Eredion said. “I trust your word that she's important to this
discussion.”
“Thank you,” Oruen said, not looking at Pieas. “The incident between Lady Nissa of Sessin and Lord
Cafad Scratha was serious, differences in telling aside. But in the end, Nissa chose not to press charges
against Scratha. She considered it an unfortunate mix-up of identity and communication.”
“In other words,” Lord Eredion said, “she damn well should have told him who she was. She knew he
hated our family.”
Oruen nodded. “She admitted that herself, yes. All she wanted was her apology conveyed, and she
hoped for a similar response from Scratha. But Scratha refused his part. Since I had to dosomething , I
gave him a choice of punishments.” He stared at his linked hands for a moment, brooding, then went on:
“He chose temporary banishment to the Stone Islands, and voluntarily gave me control ofhis lands—”
Pieas was abruptly on his feet. Eredion made no move to stop him; his own mouth hung slightly open in
astonishment.
“—in order to be sure, under desert law, that he will have them when he returns. Alyea will be leading my
embassy to hold Scratha Fortress until I release Cafad Scratha from his penance.”
“You cannot banish a properly named desert lord!” Pieas snapped. “Or take his lands under your hand!”
“He chose both,” Oruen said. “He offered his lands, and chose his banishment, freely, rather than offer
apology to Nissa. I found it a suitable and legal arrangement.”
Alyea drew a long breath, rapidly fitting together implications. In essence, she'd just been handed control
of a desert fortress, as representative of the king. Depending on how this fell out, she could find herself
ranked as a desert lord, with the king's backing: an absolutely unheard-of situation—

Page 33

Which also might just place herabove Pieas Sessin in rank. She fought against a wide grin.
“Under desert law,” Eredion said slowly, “the lord of a fortress has the right to abdicate his lands in a
manner of his choosing, but that has not been done in hundreds of years, and never to a northern king.
The last case was of Wiyric of Tehay Family, who gave over his lands to F'Heing in payment of a
monstrous gambling debt, went with his entire family to the deep sands in shame, and never returned. The
Stone Islands is not the place of shame for the desert families. It is not the right place to have sent Lord
Scratha.”
“If you like,” Oruen said amiably, “I will certainly summon Scratha back, and send him to the deep sands
to die; but his offer of stewardship was voluntary and unprompted in any way—and so, under desert law,
holds regardless of Lord Scratha's punishment. If he dies, then the crown will hold his lands: not only for
a short time, but forever. I thought this the better way, given the relatively small offense involved.”
Eredion let out a harsh breath, clearly startled. “You are right, Lord Oruen.”
“Right?” Pieas blazed. “Right?How can you say that? No desert Family has ever handed authority to any
king!”
“We have no choice,” Eredion said. “Lord Scratha is within his rights, and Lord Oruen is entitled to
accept the freely made offer.”
“We can call for a Conclave,” Pieas said.
“Feel free,” Oruen said calmly.
“Pieas,” Eredion said, sounding exasperated, “a Conclave isn't a simple matter—”
“But the decision of a Conclave is binding even on a king, isn't it? I demand a Conclave!”
Oruen smiled, unruffled. “You can't make that demand, Pieas,” he said. “Even Eredion can’t. Only the
head of a desert Family can call for a Conclave. You'll have to travel back to Sessin Fortress and
convince Lord Antouin Sessin yourself.”
Eredion snapped, “Pieas, sitdown.Stay down. Andshut up .”
His nephew, mouth folding into sulky lines, sank back to perch tautly on the edge of the plush chair.
Alyea rubbed at her nose to hide a grin at Pieas's discomfort; a stern eyebrow quirk from Oruen settled
her down.
The elder Sessin drew a long breath and said, more quietly, “This situation requires a good amount of
thought. May we have a day to consider, and gain audience to discuss this further tomorrow evening?”
“Certainly,” Oruen said. “We would all be the better for some rest.”
Alyea made a quick decision; whatever might happen tomorrow, she didn't want to lose the chance she
had right now. It was too good to let go. She stood.
“My lord King,” she said, hands clasped tightly behind her back, “I have a complaint of my own to press,
one of a sensitive nature best discussed in the privacy of this room.”

Page 34

By the look he gave her, he'd desperately wanted to retire to sleep and wasn't at all pleased at the delay.
“It has bearing on Sessin Family?” he asked warily.
“It has bearing on Pieas Sessin,” she said.
“Lies!” Pieas cried, coming up out of his chair again; this time Eredion reached out and hauled him back
down. “Lord Oruen, she offers only lies!”
“Without even knowing what she has to say?” the king inquired. “Let her speak before you cast doubt on
her word, Pieas.”
Alyea took a deep breath. “I think you know my maid, Wian; you recommended her to my service some
years ago,” she said, a blatant lie that Oruen had the wisdom not to challenge openly, although his
expression warned her not to push further. She explained about the encounter, careful to stick to absolute
truth from that point on. “I am dismayed, sire,” she finished, “that desert immunity is being so abused as
to allow rape in the very palace halls.”
Eredion's expression bore the dark ferocity of a thundercloud now; his stare at Pieas made the young
man squirm in deep discomfort.
“It's a lie,” Pieas said, sounding much less confident now. “The servant girl is just a whore. She insisted
on dragging me into a deserted hallway.”
“I will speak for her honor,” Alyea said. “The king knows her and will speak for her honor as well. Are
you calling us both liars, then?”
One of Oruen's eyebrows cocked, just a little, signaling strong displeasure at that maneuver.
Stuck, Pieas looked to Eredion. “I swear to you, I never asked for more than the girl was willing to give.
Any marks are those of passion, not struggle.”
“I would have an easier time believing you,” Eredion rumbled, “if this was the first such complaint, Pieas.”
“No complaint of rape has ever been proven against me,” Pieas said. A shadow of panic lurked beneath
the bluster.
“You've never had noble accusers before,” Eredion said. “It's far easier to believe a commoner or
servant is out to wrench a handful of gold from us; but if Lord Oruen himself can speak to this girl's
character. . . .”
Oruen's eyes narrowed. Afraid he was about to choose sides—and not hers—Alyea took a deep breath
and, for Wian's sake, broke her promise to herself.
“I'll do more than speak to Wian's character. I present my own. Some years ago, Pieas took me by
surprise as I walked in the town, and the bruises he left took days to fade.” And before the bruises had
faded, Ethu had begun training her to make sure that such a thing never happened again; but she left that
part silent.
The king's eyebrows came down into a sharp frown.

Page 35

“Ido recall those bruises,” Oruen said. “You wouldn't tell me where they came from.”
She tried not to flinch from his stare. “There was nothing you could do. He was in Ninnic's favor, and my
family wasn't.”
There might have been the faintest flicker in his eyes, a hint of something she'd thought long gone; her
heart turned over in her chest. A moment later Oruen's expression flattened again, and she looked away,
jaw tight, and cursed herself for hoping.
“Are you claiming that Pieas raped you, Lady?” Eredion demanded.
“I am,” she said clearly, then took a gamble. “And I also ask for bloodright, which I will stand to myself.”
Itsounded impressive, and she was fairly sure that blood-right was just a first-blood duel; but as soon as
she'd said it a bad feeling began to churn in her stomach.
Eredion studied her with narrowed eyes, calculating; and Pieas's grey face slowly regained its color and
creased into an arrogant smile. “Bloodright under kingdom law, or under desert law?” Eredion said at
last, cautiously.
“Kingdom,” Oruen said before Alyea could even open her mouth. Just as well; she hadn't been sure of
the difference. “I'm sure Alyea wants no part of a desert holding beyond what she's already being
granted.”
She nodded, agreeing fervently, glad he'd answered for her.
Eredion visibly relaxed. Pieas sneered.
“You have nothing to worry about,s'a-ketan ,” the younger Sessin said. “She has no skill at arms.”
Eredion turned a black glare on his sister's son. “And how would you know that?”
Pieas scrambled to repair his mistake; before he managed two words, Eredion lifted a hand to cut him
off.
“Lord Oruen,“ the elder Sessin said, directing a sober glance to the king, “if you're minded to allow this
challenge, I'll stand on my authority as a lord of Sessin Family and permit it as well. I have to warn you
both, in fairness, that I know Pieas as a skilled fighter with an unfortunate lack of scruples. I have little
doubt as to the outcome.”
“I can't refuse her choice,” Oruen said dryly. “She knows what she's doing.”
“What about your placement of her as embassy head to Scratha fortress?” Eredion said suddenly.
“That's a binding she'd be abandoning if she fell in challenge. That makes her choice illegal; she has to call
a champion to represent her.” He looked deeply relieved at the thought.
Alyea kept her expression still with an effort. Fall in challenge? That didn't sound like a first-blood duel.
Her hands tightened into fists.
“Unfortunately,” Oruen said, “she hasn't been sworn to that yet; you yourself asked for a delay.” He
rubbed wearily at his eyes, and shot a sharp glance at Alyea.

Page 36

The elder Sessin turned a bleak stare on Pieas. “You've been a concern to me for years, Pieas,” he said.
“I've seen you get away with more than your due, and walk proud in the company of madmen and
murderers your father would have shunned. I'm at the end of my tolerance for you. If she falls, I will claim
my own right as lord of Sessin, and challenge you myself.”
Pieas stared at his uncle as if he couldn't believe his ears. “You would betray me like that?”
“You've already betrayed Sessin,” Eredion said roughly. “From Water's End to Bright Bay, good people
turn away to avoid your path, while disgraceful men steer straight for you. You're putting a reputation to
our name that we don't want and can't afford. I've tried to warn you, and you've refused to listen, so you
have three choices. Kill Lady Alyea, and face me after. Submit yourself to Lord Oruen's punishment
instead of taking up the challenge. Or run disowned into the deep desert, to make your own way as you
will.”
Alyea stood frozen and trying to look placid; she hadn't expected such violent support from the elder
Sessin, and the wordskill Lady Alyea had locked her throat with horror.Nota first-blood duel, then. How
could she have been so stupid?
The terrified look on Pieas's face suggested he wouldn't dare to go up against Eredion; two options
remained. Which would prove more distasteful to him she couldn't guess.
The younger man's jaw worked for a moment; then he said, hoarsely, “I'd like a day to consider. May
we . . . continue this along with the other discussion tomorrow night?”
“Certainly,” Oruen agreed, seeming relieved. The two Sessins departed, Eredion's hand clamped firmly
on the younger man's shoulder.
“Wait a bit,” Oruen said as the door closed again. “Let them get some distance before you leave.”
“I had no intention of tagging their heels.” Alyea sat on the arm of a chair, studying the man across from
her intently. “You look tired.”
“I am,” Oruen said, slumping back into the cushions of his chair and rubbing his dark eyes. “Gods, I'm
tired. I begin to think I made a serious mistake, accepting this crown.”
Alyea said nothing. He wasn't about to abandon the throne, after all he'd gone through to place his rear
end on it.
“Are you planning on your aqeyva training being enough to beat Pieas with?” Oruen said after a while.
“Because you're an idiot if that's all you're counting on. Eredion's right; Pieas is a nasty piece of work.”
She shook her head, unwilling to admit the extent of her mistake. Even if blood-right had meant a simple
duel, the move had been pure madness, more bluff than anything else, now that she thought back on it.
What had she wanted?
For Oruen to stop her. For him to say—
—oh, gods, was she still that mad about him? He'd made it clear . . . or had he?
She couldn't resist finding out if that flicker of emotion, when he'd heard of Pieas's attack on her, had
been real or imagined. “Why did you choose me for this?”

Page 37

He had closed his eyes while she brooded; he opened them now and smiled. “Why not you?”
“I'm only eighteen,” she said as emotionlessly as she could. “You have men and women in your service
with the dignity of age and the wisdom of years who could handle this much better. Just because you
seduced me once is no reason to give me important assignments like this one. Or do you want me out
from nearby, to avoid the reminder?”
His smile hadn't faded; he watched her with a fond, if exhausted, expression. “You're a relative unknown,
where those more seasoned diplomats already have reputations and enemies among the desert Families.
You also have no taint of having been under Ninnic's service, which in itself will ease tempers along the
way.”
“I can't be the only one like that,” she said, hoping her expression didn't betray the sinking feeling in her
stomach. He'd carefully ignored the unsubtle prompt. “And I'm certainly not the most diplomatic envoy
you have to hand.”
“You're the only one I trust,” he told her. “Young, yes, but you're sharp, and you've proven your loyalty
beyond any question. This position requires a tremendous amount of trust. Diplomacy you can learn. And
a rough edge can be a help, sometimes, with the desert lords.”
She frowned at him. “Most girls my age are married already, with a child on their hip.”
“You've often said that idea bores you to screaming,” he countered. “Has that changed? I could find you
a good husband within a day.”
“No,” she said. “It still bores me.” She grinned at him, finding her resentment suddenly sloughing off like
water over hard ground. She'd been a fool to hope anything had changed. “All right, I'll do it.”
“Thank you,” he said. “Now, I need some sleep. We'll meet here again an hour after tomorrow's dinner
ends.”

By the end of the next day, rumor had already flown round the palace: Pieas Sessin had departed
without a word in the middle of the night.
“It's true,” Eredion said, his face dark with anger when presented with the question that evening after
dinner. Alyea had arrived moments before the desert lord. “He's taken his horse, and those of his
belongings that travel comfortably. I did not give him leave to go.”
“Where is he headed?” the king asked, his own expression hard.
“I don't know,” Eredion said. “I can't believe he'd be so foolish as to make his way back to the desert.
I've sent a messenger-bird to Water's End, and to Sessin Family Fortress, warning them to hold him
against my return if he shows up there.”
Oruen rubbed at his eyes briefly. “You must have some guess as to where he would go.”

Page 38

“You likely have the same guess,” Eredion said. “The Stone Islands, to hunt Scratha.”
The king seemed unsurprised by the thought, and not particularly worried.
“Yes,” he said. “I've sent word to the dock captains already to watch for him, and messenger-birds to
the coastal villages nearby. If Pieas tries to catch passage on a ship to the Stone Islands, we may not be
able to stop him, but we'll know about it within a day.”
Eredion turned to Alyea. “I offer my apologies, and offer my services as some compensation. If you need
anything, now or any day in the future, call on me. I'll do what I can to help.”
“Thank you,” she said, startled. “That's a generous offer.”
He displayed another brief, intense smile. “I know. I'm counting on you not to abuse it.”
“I won't,” she said, at the same time Oruen said: “She won't, Eredion.”
They all laughed, the tension easing, and leaned back in their chairs.
“Let's have some wine,” Oruen suggested. “I'd like to hear your thoughts, Eredion, on the posting I'm
proposing to give to Alyea. You have experience she lacks, and she's doubtless interested in your
advice.”
“She won't take advantage, maybe,” Eredion said wryly, “but you're transparent, Lord Oruen.”
“The desert Families keep themselves very private,” Oruen said with a shrug. “Do you blame me for
being curious?”
“No,” Eredion said. “Not really. A good king should take every chance to learn about his people and
allies, and I think you're the first good king this palace has seen for far too long.”
“Thank you,” Oruen said, sounding deeply flattered. “More wine?”
“Now you're trying to get me drunk so I'll spill Family secrets,” Eredion laughed, and held out his glass.
“You'll find it harder than you think.”
Oruen just smiled.

Chapter Three
Idisio quickly decided that learning to ride a horse would always be one of his least favorite memories.
If, of course, he lived through it; after the fourth time the horse threw him, that began to seem highly
unlikely. Either the falls would break something vital, the horse would step on something critical, or
Scratha would lose the remnants of a short temper and throttle him.

Page 39

“I should have stayed on the streets,” Idisio muttered, glaring nose to nose with his horse. It stared back
with deceptively sleepy eyes.
“I should have left you there,” Scratha said. He rubbed at his eyes, glanced around, and turned his horse
away from the road at a sharp angle. “Lead the horse,” he called back over his shoulder.
Idisio slogged over loose, sandy ground, walking-weed hitching at his ankles and legs. He spared a
moment's weary gratitude that his master had allowed the time to change into more suitable traveling
clothes before the disastrous riding lessons began. The sturdy linen of his new outfit had held up well so
far, although Idisio suspected he'd be spending hours picking out the tiny green seeds.
If, of course, they ever got around to resting. Idisio stumbled, legs threatening to give way under him. It
occurred to him, through a grey haze, that he wouldn't be standing, let alone walking, much longer.
“Sit down before you fall over,” Scratha said at last. “I'll come back for you.” He took the reins from
Idisio's hand. Not caring whether he fell in the middle of a patch of walking-weed or blood ants, Idisio
felt the ground come up under his body and was aware of nothing more for a while.
When his eyes were willing to open again, he found Scratha carrying him, cradling him like a child. Idisio
mumbled incoherent protest, ashamed.
“Quiet,” Scratha said, astonishingly gentle, and Idisio's eyelids, like undeniable, heavy weights, slid closed
again.

The next time he woke, accumulated aches and bruises hammered at Idisio before his eyes were fully
open. The smell of smoke came next, and the unmistakable aroma of food; Idisio's stomach woke with a
loud growl at that. A woman laughed nearby.
Idisio struggled to sit up and focus sleep-bleared vision. Scratha knelt beside him.
“Don't get up,” Scratha said. “Your feet are wrapped. I'll bring you some food, if you're of a mind to
eat.”
Idisio nodded, and the woman laughed again. Blinking past Scratha, the boy saw an old woman sitting
cross-legged by a low table; her hair was pure white, her face lined and weathered like a thick log after a
sandstorm. With no stiffness to her movements, she reached to scoop food from a wooden platter into a
wide-mouthed wooden bowl, then turned a sharp, bright glance his way.
Fine, wide glass windows spilled light across the plain wooden floors and low, desert-style furniture.
Large, colorful sitting cushions surrounded the table; the old woman sat on a deep purple one, and Idisio
had been laid out on a wide bench covered with several more. Tall, glazed earthenware vases stood
around the room: some as tall as Idisio, and all with dried or fresh flowers in them. A squat cookstove
hulked against one wall, large enough to give heat to the room in cold weather; shelves nearby held jars
of vegetables, meats, jams, and jellies.Glassjars, and well-made; this woman had to be as wealthy as a
desert lord herself, to have so many fine things.
“What's your name, boy?” the woman asked as Scratha squatted beside Idisio again, bowl of food in

Page 40

hand.
“Idisio,” he said, taking the bowl from his master. A hunk of fresh bread, a pile of folded eggs speckled
with green and red herbs, and a thick wedge of sourfruit; the food from the palace kitchen seemed to
have been years ago. Idisio tore through the food, casting aside all his lessons on manners, slowed only
by gulps from the mug of cool water his master held out to him. The eggs were just cool enough to pick
up without scorching his fingers, the sourfruit sun-warmed and fresher than any he'd ever tasted before;
he wiped juice and crumbs from his chin, surprised to find the bowl empty, and looked up to see two
amused faces watching him.
“He's a boy still, Cafad,” the woman said. “Give me that bowl again. He'll need more than that.”
Idisio almost dropped the bowl as Scratha reached for it; the desert lord grabbed it, his expression
souring, and said, “Yes. She knows who I am and the truth of the situation.”
“I knowyour understanding of the situation,” the woman corrected, a touch sharply; her smile took some
of the sting out of the words. “Give me the bowl already.”
She filled the bowl twice more before Idisio motioned that he'd had enough.
“I thank you, my lady.” Idisio wiped at his face again and burped. “That was marvelous.”
“You're welcome, Idisio,” she said. “And you needn't call melady. I left that word behind me long ago.
Azni will do fine.”
Now that his stomach had been filled, other pains, along with his bladder, began to command his
attention again, even as Scratha asked, “How do you feel, boy?”
“He hurts everywhere,” the woman said before Idisio could answer, “and he thinks you're a damned fool
for dragging him all over until his feet are blistered.”
“No,” Idisio said quickly, afraid of looking as if he agreed, “I mean, I hurt, but I . . . I don't think you're a
fool, my lo . . . Master.” Or should it be 'my lord', since the woman knew Scratha's true identity? He
couldn't decide, but as neither Scratha nor the strange woman seemed offended, he let it pass without
further attempt at correction.
“Well, you ought to,” the old woman said. “Because heis a fool for it.”
“All right,” Scratha said sourly, reaching for a pail of water, a cloth, and a small jar that were all on the
floor nearby. “Let be already.”
“I'll knock it in until I think you're actually listening,” she replied. “We haven't got there yet.”
Trying to divert the conversation and ease the dangerous tension hardening his master's jaw, Idisio said,
“Where are we?”
Scratha reached out and flipped the blanket back from Idisio's feet, which were wrapped in linen
bandages.
“We're in Azni's home,” he said unhelpfully, and began to unwind the wrappings. For all his rough
temper, he kept his movements gentle and careful.

Page 41

Azni snorted. “About six miles northeast of Bright Bay is the right answer, and little enough to give at
that.”
“You value your privacy,” Scratha said.
The wrappings dropped in a pile to one side. Holding Idisio's ankle, Scratha raised the foot slightly,
squinting as he examined it. With his free hand he dropped the piece of cloth into the pail of water, pulled
it out, and squeezed. Water dribbled back into the pail; the sound reminded Idisio of his increasingly full
bladder.
“The boy's not about to lead a horde of murderers to my home,” Azni retorted.
Scratha made a face and began dabbing at Idisio's foot with the damp cloth. Idisio tensed, expecting it to
hurt, but felt only a faint tickling as his lord wiped away a layer of salve. Twice he hissed as the tickling
shot into a sharp burning sensation; each time Scratha nodded without looking up. “No,” Scratha
muttered under his breath as he worked, “I'm the only one likely to do that.”
Azni showed sharp hearing for her age; she said, in a much gentler voice, “You haven't yet, Cafad, and I
don't expect you will.” The previous layer of salve wiped away, Scratha spread more over two small
spots at the edges of Idisio's left foot and let it rest on the cushion again, not bothering with bandages. He
started unwrapping Idisio's right foot.
“This time is different, Azni. I've offended the whole of Sessin, and Pieas is after me.”
“You don't know that,” she said.
He paused in his ministrations and looked over his shoulder at her. “Pieas Sessin fights if he farts and
someone has the gall to smile. He's killed over a wrong word before, when that word involved his sister.
And I threw the girl out into the street half-dressed and named her a whore to all within hearing.”
“And if you'd known she was Pieas's sister, would that have held you back?” Azni asked.
Scratha held still for a moment, looking at her, then turned back to unwrapping Idisio's foot. “No. I was
too angry.”
“Done is done,” the old woman said. “You'll deal with what comes. Even Pieas Sessin isn't fool enough
to breach my walls in hunt of you, Cafad. He'll wait for you to leave—if he even knows you've come this
way.”
“I covered my tracks from the road, but he'll know soon enough I haven't gone to the Stone Islands,”
Scratha said.
“If he has the wit to stop and ask the right questions,” Azni said, “which I doubt; and if he's angry, that's
even less likely to happen. If he's mad enough to hunt a full desert lord in the first place, he'll go west to
the harbor, which gives you days to clear my home. Stop worrying so.” Scratha wiped Idisio's foot with
the damp cloth. The pressure in Idisio's bladder built steadily. “My lo . . . Master,” Idisio said, catching
himself again at the last second, and hesitated, not sure how to put the matter while a woman of obvious
status stood in the room.
The eunuch hadn't covered how to sayI have to take a piss in front of a noblewoman.

Page 42

“Almost done,” Scratha said without looking up. “Let's talk on something else, Azni.” He set Idisio's foot
down and sat back.
“Fine,” the old woman said. “Go get the boy a chamber pot before he floods my floor. I don't want him
walking yet.”
Idisio felt a deep heat climb into his face as Scratha stood and left the room without comment.
“I've raised children without benefit of servants,” the old woman said, smiling. “I'm not so easily
embarrassed as all that.”
She did have the kindness, when Scratha returned, to leave the room while Idisio relieved himself.
“Master,” Idisio said after the chamber pot had been decently lidded again and pushed to one side, “who
isshe?” He decided that using the term 'my lord' might trip him up in the future; better to start using the
'proper' public term now and avoid, as much as possible, using actual names aloud. That seemed safe
enough.
Scratha sighed and settled to the floor, leaning back against the wall with his long legs stretched before
him. “Sheused to be Lady Azaniari Aerthraim,” he said. “She left her family and married Lord Regav
Darden.”
Idisio's jaw loosened. The streets of Bright Bay called those two families dangerous. Darden had a
reputation for ruthlessness and the Aerthraim raised caution from mystery. And they were supposedly as
amicable with one another as fire and oil.
“After Lord Regav died,” Scratha said, smiling slightly at Idisio's stunned expression, “Azni decided that
she'd had enough of living in the deep desert and moved here. I've stayed with her often in recent years.
She's one of the few people I trust.” His expression darkened. “I've always been careful to keep that
secret, to avoid drawing danger down on her.”
“I can take care of myself,” the lady in question said as she came back into the room. “Really, Cafad,
after all I've taught you, don't you know any better than that?”
Idisio's master bent his head and said nothing.
“You need to rest, Cafad,” Azni said. “Go get some sleep. I'll bore your boy here back to his own rest,
and teach him a few things he'll need to know if he's to play at taking care of you.” She smiled at Idisio.
“He hasn't slept at all,” she added in a loud whisper. “Worried over you, no doubt.”
Raising his head, Scratha rolled his eyes and heaved himself to his feet. “I had a lot to talk to you about,
Azni,” he said. “Don't make it sound something it wasn't. This boy doesn't need any help with his ego.”
“Of course,” she said, tone bland, eyes bright with mischief.
He shook his head and snorted. “We leave in the morning,” he said, and left the room.
Azni smiled as she watched the tall man walk away, then turned to Idisio with a brisk motion. “Now, tell
me about yourself. Everything. I know Cafad didn't even bother asking your name; typical of him. I tore
him raw over that. Even servants deserve respect, especially if they have to put up with someone like

Page 43

Cafad.”
“That's all right,s'a,” Idisio said, feeling clumsy and awkward. Ancient as she seemed, she still had a
graceful and cool demeanor that he'd never been faced with before. “I mean, I'm used to not accounting
for much.”
He wished he hadn't said it as soon as the words were out; her gaze sharpened instantly, like a blacktail
hawk about to drop on a mouse.
“Cafad said he caught you trying to steal from him,” she said. “You're a street-thief, then?”
Idisio nodded, feeling the color rising to his face again. He couldn't stand to meet her stare any longer. “I
never knew my parents. Some beggar-thieves raised me, but they never pretended to be related. They
were always clear they'd found me as an abandoned infant.”
He bit his lip at the prickling pain of that—and at the recurring vision of a pair of wild grey eyes staring
into his. Why had that been so vivid an image? And why did he feel it was important? He shrugged and
turned his attention to talking.
“The street thieves waved me around, when I was a baby, to get sympathy and coin from the nobles;
when I grew too old for that I took up thieving myself. I've been living the streets my whole life.” He
grimaced, wondering why he was babbling so much to a near-stranger, then knew: to avoid thinking
about those haunted grey eyes.
She said nothing for a while. He could feel that intent stare burning into him. At last she said, “You've
been used for more than sympathy.”
“I grew up on the streets, whaddya think?” he started to say, intending it as a hard-edged warning to
back off; found his voice choking off into unexpected hoarseness and then silence halfway through. He
shut his eyes, tears prickling against his eyelids; biting his tongue hard held them back.
“Yeah,” he husked after a moment.
“Idisio,” Azni said, “I'm not prying, and I'm not offering pity. Life is what it is, ugly and bitter and sweet
and fine all together. I've been through my own rough times, and so has Cafad. But we probably had
more support than you ever dreamed of knowing. You surviving this long means you have more strength,
in some ways, than many people. Keep that in mind, if Cafad ever tries to intimidate you. And remember
this, too: he's not as hard-hearted as he tries to act.”
She drew a breath, lightened her tone, and began to talk of less serious things. Idisio, relieved, let himself
be drawn back out into conversation and even shared some of the funnier stories from his life on the
streets.
They talked for what the remainder of the day, until a fire had to be set in the stove and bowls of stew
ladled out of the large pot. They talked by candlelight as they ate, as she cleaned up, and by the time
Idisio dropped back to sleep on his pallet, his head spun from the things he'd learned. Politics and family
ties, blood oaths and noble secrets and gossip, and, woven in here and there, casual comments on the
best way to mend clothes, cook food, and ride a horse.
A few words from her had explained more about that than hours of his master's cursing and admonitions.
He also had a better idea of what it had meant for Scratha to change his name and take to the road, with

Page 44

his true name in official disgrace and his true person in the king's service. If he'd simply gone traveling as
Lord Cafad Scratha, with his desert holding empty and unprotected, desert law would have given rights
to any who chose to occupy it for a year's time. He could have come home to find himself homeless. But
by placing his land in the king's hands and his true name in temporary public disgrace, the king himself
had to keep the holding open for Scratha, whether this journey took months or years.
As even a temporary holder of a desert fortress, whatever the legal fiction involved, the king had just
acquired certain rights and the other desert families certain obligations. The traditional independence of
the desert families from the actual kingdom had just developed a small but significant political
vulnerability.
“He’s always been rash,” Azni sighed. “Rash and quicktempered and hard to reason with. He regrets
afterwards, but never remembers long enough for next time. Your worst task, Idisio, will be keeping his
temper under hand and him out of trouble. I don't think he really has any notion what he's done, choosing
to travel as nothing more than a court researcher. He has no idea what it's like, not being treated as a
noble. He thinks he does. He really, truly, doesn't.”
She shook her head slowly. They went on to other topics, and finally she declared herself too tired to talk
further. She left the room with a gracious goodnight and a lit candle by his pallet; he blew it out and
settled back on his cushions soon after.
Idisio stared into the darkness of a room gone quiet but for late-night insect noise and tried to think it all
through. He didn't get far before the darkness crawled inside him and swallowed him into sleep.

His feet didn't hurt. The throbbing, aching pain of the previous two days was completely gone. His
muscles still protested the unaccustomed exercise of riding, but his feet, unswollen and unblistered, slid
back into the hard black boots without complaint.
Azni gave Idisio a jar of salve. “For next time Cafad works you too hard,” she said with a smile, and
pressed another onto Idisio's master with an admonition not to waste them. Scratha treated the small
earthenware jar with a respect that told Idisio it was a precious gift; as if his miraculously healed feet
weren't evidence enough of that.
His horse remained placid and obedient now. It snorted and shied occasionally when a sand-grouse or
tizzy-lizard darted out from underfoot. Idisio, more comfortable with riding every mile that passed, held
his seat and patted the side of the beast's neck until it calmed again. He noticed that his master's horse
hadn't even made that slight twitch of reaction, plodding along uninterested in bird or lizard.
“He's a good rider,” Azni had told Idisio the previous night. “Better than perhaps he even realizes. He's
got a gift with animals. But he's impatient with anyone who doesn't grasp a skill as quickly as he does. If it
comes natural to him, then it should be easy for all; if it's hard for him, then it doesn't need doing by
anyone.”
Scratha turned abruptly in the saddle and stared at him. “Where do I begin?”
“Pardon?” Idisio blinked, startled.

Page 45

Scratha waved impatiently for Idisio to move forward beside him.
“Where do I start?” he repeated once the two horses were abreast.
“I don't understand,” Idisio said, completely bewildered. His master's dark eyes bored into him as if
expecting a better answer.
“With this stupid history!” Scratha said. “What do I write about? What do I even call it? When do I
start? It's all nonsense.” He stared ahead, brooding and dark.
Idisio drew a breath slowly, holding back a grin. “You could start with Lady Azni.”
“No,” Scratha said immediately. “She's not to be mentioned at all. I want her left alone.”
“Then start with the first village we come to.”
Scratha pulled his horse to a halt and sat still. “But what do Isay?”
“I don't know, my . . . Master,” Idisio said. “I can't even read.”
Scratha stared at him for a long moment, then said, “I'll have to fix that. I'll need you to be able to read
soon.”
Idisio nodded, speechless. He'd always wanted to learn to read, but it was a hard skill to pick up in the
streets, where reading meant time away from making money for survival. He'd always been told most
lords preferred their servants illiterate.
“I'd like that,” he said.
“We'll start tonight,” Scratha said. “And you have the right idea. We'll start with the first village. There's
one just outside Bright Bay, isn't there? By the marshes?”
“Ye-e-ess,” Idisio said reluctantly, “but—”
“Then we start there.” Scratha shook the reins, turned the horse’s head more south than east, and
nudged into a trot.

Chapter Four
White sand, blown over the wide paving stones of the King's Road by the ever-present sea breeze,
scraped under the horses' hooves. Alyea treasured the sound. The road and the alabaster sands of the
coast both petered out at roughly the same time; once that gratingshiss stopped, she would be in alien
territory, completely dependent on the handful of advisors and guardsmen who had been sent with her.
The advisors rode horses of a bloodline second only to the News-Riders' mounts; the guards walked
behind.

Page 46

“You need to strike a delicate balance between appearing lazy and appearing hasty,” the bony old man
riding beside her said. “Both can get you killed; bothwill lose you respect. Four days to reach Water's
End. No more hurrying than that, no less easy a pace than that. Three way-stops and we'll be in Water's
End midday on the fourth.”
Lord Eredion Sessin had said something similar about respect, during their meeting with the king two
nights ago.
“The desert holds its own time,” he'd told her. “You're good at the northern courtesies, but those won't
do you any good in the south. We're a slow folk, but far from stupid; in the time northerns rattle off five
wrong answers to a question, we've thought through twenty and only say the right response. Hurrying
won't gain you any respect, so learn to slow down.” Shortly afterward, he'd been called away and hadn't
been able to speak with her again before she left. Now she depended on Chac for the information she'd
expected to get from Lord Sessin.
Chac had always been something of an enigma. He'd been close to Oruen, helping plot the overthrow of
the former king, but beyond that she knew little about him; he lived just outside the Seventeen Gates, had
no family, held no status she could determine, and refused all formal recognition or invitations from
anyone with noble blood. But Oruen had seen fit to send Chac, along with Micru, to accompany her
south, so apparently part of the old man's mysterious past included knowledge of the southlands.
She looked sideways, studying his leathery, sun-wrinkled face for a moment, then said, “When were you
last in the desert, Chac? The true desert.”
“Years,” he said, his gaze on the distant arc of the Crescent Mountains to the southwest. “Many, many
years. I used to go once a year on a desert walk to clear the sludge of the city out of my veins.”
“And to look for the wife that ran away,” Micru said from Alyea's other side.
Chac's thin lips drew back from his teeth. He stared straight ahead, his hands crushing the thick leather
reins, and said nothing. Alyea repressed a sigh; why Oruen had sent two men who so fiercely hated each
other she couldn't understand, but the animosity had been made clear before they even passed through
the southern gates of Bright Bay.
“Why did you stop going on desert walks, Chac?” she said, shooting Micru a sharp, repressive glare.
For a moment, she thought Chac might refuse to answer, too aggravated by Micru's repeated barbs to
talk any longer, but at last he said, “Ninnic. That stupid Travelers' Law made it impossible. I couldn't
afford the taxes; they were doubled on the south gates.”
“And the guards paid more attention to who went in and out,” Micru noted, not turning his gaze from the
near-sleepy examination of the terrain ahead. Chac seemed unoffended by that comment, so either it had
missed its mark or it actually hadn't been intended as an insult.
Alyea shook her head. “Gods preserve us from those days ever coming again,” she muttered, not aware
she'd spoken aloud until Chac answered.
“Asking the gods to save us from that madness,” the old man said, “ignores the fact that the gods
permitted it to happen in the first place.”

Page 47

“The gods do as the gods do,” Micru said. “Anger at the gods is foolish and a waste of time.You ought
to know that by now, Chacerly.”
Chac stiffened, a dangerous light in his eyes.
Alyea said sharply, “Stop it, both of you! We're barely clear of Bright Bay. If you're going to act like
squabbling children the whole way, I'll turn around right now and ask Oruen to pick new advisors for
me.”
They both turned to look at her, visibly astonished. Micru's dark eyes narrowed slightly, while Chac's
almost disappeared in the wrinkles of his squint; she wondered if she'd gone too far. Sworn to protect
her or not, angering one of the Hidden was stupid, and she suspected Chac could get thoroughly nasty as
well.
After exchanging a brief, calculating glare in which hostilities were wordlessly suspended but not
forgotten, both men turned their attention stiffly forward and fell silent. Alyea let out a long breath and
wished, uselessly, that horses could grow wings and fly them all direct to Scratha Fortress.

Alyea stood on the edge of a steep drop and stared at the vast spread of the Goldensea, far below and
to the west. The sun had melted into a bronze-gold puddle on the water. Small dots were moving
towards the coast: probably fishing boats bringing in the day's catch. The air, darkening towards dusk,
felt clear and sharp in her nose.
The erratically climbing path had already taken them higher above sea level than she'd ever been before.
Sand colors had gradually shifted to white, then grey, then changed entirely to pale brown rock; the
stench of a busy coastal city gave way to the sweet, thick, and earthy tones of scrub-sage and clay dust.
The transformations created an entirely new landscape, one she needed to stand still and adjust to. When
Chacerly went to direct the lodging arrangements in the way-stop behind her, she took the opportunity to
move to a nearby overlook spot.
From the coastal lowlands of Bright Bay, the Horn climbed sharply to a near-mountain height. Jagged
cliffs rose on one side of the trail; a steep drop lay on the other—and which side was the cliff might shift
with no apparent transition.
Court sages liked to argue over whether the Horn was a natural place or an aberration created by the
gods. It rose too high, too sharply, and the weather patterns were all wrong, said one side, while the
other argued it was proof that nature was far more complex than mankind's limited mind could
understand.
Alyea closed her eyes and breathed deeply, then looked out at the ocean. That water had always been
close enough to dip her toes into, with less than an hour's walk; now it was close to a day's walk, if a
path so short could be found across the broken ground of the Horn.
Soon it would be farther yet, and after that, gone from sight. The land past the Horn widened into
another vast continent, and her path lay straight down the center. Scratha Fortress sat deep in the sands
of the true desert, a ten-day ride from the east coast, easily three times that to the west coast. To the
south would be only more sand, and beyond that, the forbidden Haunted Lands and southern jungles.

Page 48

She shivered. The breeze swirling up to her felt cold, misty, and unpleasant compared to the warm
evening sea breezes common in Bright Bay this time of year. She turned away and headed for the inn.
Way-stops in the Horn were the only places for merchants and travelers to pause overnight. At this one,
indoor rooms and stables proper were reserved for important people; commoners pitched their bedrolls
and sheltered their mounts in low-walled enclosures covered by heavy, waterproof canvas tents. In
deference to her noble blood, Alyea had a room indoors. Chac had told her to keep her status as king's
representative quiet for the moment, out of concern that someone might try to challenge her holding of
Scratha Fortress before she took actual possession of the land.
She couldn't see that happening, but had to defer to Chac's judgement. Not for the first time, she wished
she'd had a chance to talk with Eredion Sessin about protocols and courtesies; he'd seemed much easier
to talk to than the sour old man. Certainlyfriendlier . Chac had barely said two words since her morning
rebuke.
Chacerly waited for her by the door of the inn house.
“Hurry,” he said as she approached. “The evening meal's almost ready. Go clean up.”
She was tired from the long day, sore from the miles on horseback, and wanted nothing more than to sit
in quiet to brood. “Can't I eat in my room?”
“No,” he said. “Get moving.” He followed her into the inn, caught up to her shoulder where the narrow
passage widened just enough, and said in a low voice, “One thing I'll tell you again is that youought to
have brought maidservants.”
“I don't like servants,” she said. “All they ever did was spy and tattle, and the ones that didn't were hurt
for it. I'd rather take care of myself.”
He grunted. “It looks bad. One woman with all these men. Not even women in the guards. I don't like it.”
“I'll be fine,” she said, pushing the door to her room open, and shut it in his face before he could argue
further.
It didn't take her long to strip out of the dusty leggings and tunic, sponge off road grime, and slip into a
dress. Managing without servants had given her a certain impatience for lingering over simple tasks like
dressing.
She turned, examining herself in the long mirror. The fabric hugged her narrow shoulders and arms just
enough to show line, not bone; the squared scoop of the neck showed her collarbones but nothing lower.
A thick band of gold and silver thread brocade wound around the waist, and the skirt hung long and fully
pleated. Thin red and gold shoes, little more than slippers heavily worked with a brocade that matched
the waist pattern, and a long, thin gold chain with a single hematite marble finished the outfit. Her hair she
left loose and brushed out carefully until it lay in a silky cape over her shoulders and back.
Satisfied both by her appearance and how quickly she'd managed it, although her mother would have
been horrified at her “unseemly haste”, she gave the mirror one last warm smile, practicing the
expression, then turned to the door.
Chac, waiting outside, looked her over critically as she stepped out of the room. After a moment, he
nodded and produced a thin beaded bracelet.

Page 49

“Right hand,” he said, and fastened the string of beads around her wrist. “Don't take it off.”
It seemed simple enough; small, round pieces of some dark green gemstone interspersed with squared
off, unevenly sized pieces of thick white shell, threaded on a thin golden wire.
“What does it mean?”
“It means you're wearing a bracelet,” he said, his expression closed and hard. “It means you're not a
servant. Now mind you don't toss and flutter like you're the prettiest in the room. You'll get yourself a
name you won't like later on.”
“I don't,” she started, indignant.
“I'veseen you do it,” he cut her off. “Quiet. Modest. Eyes down. And use your ears and eyes before your
mouth.”
“It's only a way-stop,” she protested.
“No such thing asonly ,” he said. “Not anywhere south of Bright Bay.Everything is important, here, and
everyone could be. Pay attention.”
“All right,” Alyea said, feeling thoroughly rebuked. Trying to move in a properly humble manner, she
followed the old man down the inn passage. “What should I be lookingfor ?”
He waited until they'd left the narrow corridor and emerged into the open air before speaking again. As
they walked across the rough ground towards the dining hall, she regretted her choice of thin slippers.
Even the raked-out sandy path, lit now with pole lanterns to either side, held numerous pebbles and
sharp rocks. She stepped with care and tried to divide her attention between Chacerly's quick, low voice
and the path ahead.
“Deiq of Stass is here,” the old man said. “He's a big man, big and dark.”
“Thanks for the warning,” Alyea said, her heart sinking.
“You know him?”
“I don't think we've been introduced, but I've seen him in court now and again. He always made me
uneasy.”
“With good reason. Stay away from him.” Chac seemed about to say more, then shook his head, his lips
pressed tight. “Just . . . just stay away from him,” he finished at last. “And don't make him angry.”
“Gladly,” Alyea said fervently. Deiq's dark stare always seemed to be sizing up everyone around him for
their value to his own personal amusement; she had no interest in speaking with him or drawing his
attention in any way.
“He's the only one of real status I've seen—not rank, he's no noble, but he has influence.” The old man
grimaced and changed the subject. “Remember that you have to earn respect. Your family blood means
much less here than it did in Bright Bay. Stay quiet until you're spoken to.”
“And if nobody speaks to me?”

Page 50

“Then you enjoy a meal in silence for once in your life. It won't kill you.”
Alyea snorted, annoyed at Chac's brusque reply, but they entered the dining hall without a single suitable
retort coming to her mind.
The dining hall was a long, low building with five bench-seat tables. The center table, set with silver
salt-cellars and a thickly embroidered, linen table-covering, was obviously for the most important guests;
the outer tables, by similar indications, sat successively less worthy folk. Guards and servants were
placed at the outermost tables, which had only bare wood and small, rough wooden bowls of coarse salt.
Chac steered her to the center table, close to the door; after a quick, assessing glance up the mostly
empty table, he said, “Sit at the end here, my lady. I'll take a table over.”
She settled obediently on the wide, wooden bench just as a deep, brassy note from a hidden gong filled
the air: once, twice, a third time. People began to stream into the room and sort themselves out into seats;
Alyea noted several subtle clashes over the seats at the center and flanking tables by newcomers. There
were few enough people and more than enough seats, however, so the disputes faded away with little
more than an evil glare here and there.
Alyea recognized a few faces, high-blood merchants and low-end nobles who had swirled through Bright
Bay her whole life. One or two, catching sight of her, smiled and nodded brief greeting; she returned the
amiable gesture in kind.
Deiq of Stass sat high at the other end of her table, watching the room with lazy interest. Alyea managed
to lean over and adjust her slipper just before his searching gaze reached her area of the table, and took
her time about sitting back up. A quick glance reassured her that his attention had fixed on a plump
woman at the next table over; she let out a thin sigh of relief.
She risked looking around the room herself, trying to keep her gaze casual. Micru, still in rough but clean
trail clothes, had chosen a spot among the servants, laughing and joking as if he were nothing more than a
low-born himself. Chacerly, at the next table, already seemed deep in conversation with the people
around him, merchants by the look of them.
Wide wooden doors opened at the far end of the hall. Alyea had assumed they led outside, but a rich,
savory smell filled the air as servants marched in carrying huge platters of food.
The richest dishes were brought to the center table, the simplest to the sides; roast pheasant and
puff-bread on silver platters for nobles, roast chicken and black bread on wooden slabs for lesser men.
The servers placed the food on plates for the more powerful, left the platters on the outer tables for the
servant-classes to argue over.
Servants placed delicately-arranged helpings of white beans and feathery greens, thin slices of roast
pheasant and puff-bread, small globes of creamed rice balls, and long strips of steamed black
mushrooms on the silver plates. Alyea applied herself to her food silently, keeping a pleasant expression
on her face. After the long day of riding, she wanted thick food, not this fluffy stuff. Hopefully Chac could
get her some dark bread and cheese from the kitchens later.
“Beautiful, aren't they?” a thin voice to her left said.
Alyea turned her head, relieved that she wouldn't have to sit silent all through dinner, and smiled at the
woman sitting a bit more than arm's length away. “It's all lovely.”

Page 51

“The mushrooms, I mean,” the woman said. She was short and wellfed, with greying brown hair framing
a contentedly round face. “I've never seen them quite so large.”
Black mushrooms from the Horn were often the size of a dinner plate and, although a delicacy, weren't all
that uncommon in Bright Bay. Alyea took a closer look at the woman, noted the northern roundness to
her face, the simple cut of her dress, and the lack of jewelry, and tried not to wince.
“Everything's so much larger here,” the woman went on. “It's lovely. I imagine you grow your gardens all
year round, here, don't you? I wish I could. You can keep basil going all year, I imagine—am I right?”
Her smile was open and innocent as she waited for an answer.
Alyea stared, taken aback. Did this woman think noblesgardened ? “I . . . I wouldn't know.”
The woman seemed to take in Alyea's dress for the first time.
“Oh, dear,” she said, her round face flushing. She glanced around the room, seeming uncertain and
flustered. “I'm sorry. Have I sat at the wrong table?”
“No,” Alyea said after a moment, ashamed of her initial, snobbish reaction. Everyone could be important,
Chac had warned her; Alyea decided, a bit impishly, that those words should apply to an ignorant
northern as well as anyone else in the room. Let him rebuke her for overfriendliness; she'd throw his own
words back in his face.
“Are you sure? I could . . . move. . . .” The woman glanced over her shoulder, visibly reluctant to leave
the good food in front of her for the lesser meals on the further tables.
“Absolutely,” Alyea assured her, flashing the warm, practiced smile. “You're fine. There's plenty of room
here, no reason to move, and you've already got food on your plate. Please, stay and talk to me. I'm
Alyea, of Bright Bay. You're from the northlands?”
“Well . . . yes,” the woman admitted, relaxing. “I'm Halla of Felarr.”
“What brings you all the way through the Forest and into the Horn,s'a Halla?” Alyea asked, interested
now. Most northerns, and especially women,didn'ttravel this far, and definitely not alone, as Halla
seemed to be.
The woman picked at her food uncertainly for a moment before answering.
“My son,” she said finally. “He wanted to travel to Bright Bay. I couldn't stop him, and my husband's
dead five years. Rebon went off with a merchanting caravan, hired on as a clerk; he's a good boy, a
smart boy.” She swallowed hard. “He never came back.”
“How long has he been gone?” Alyea asked.
“Three years,” Halla said. She stared at her plate, took a listless bite. “The merchant he worked for is
dead two years back, killed in a riot in Bright Bay. I don't know where my son is. I've spent the last four
months in Bright Bay, trying to find a trace of him; the only word I gathered, finally, is that he might have
been seen going into the desert with a group of southerners, as a slave.”
Alyea nodded, unsurprised, and said nothing.

Page 52

Halla shook her head and poked at the food on her plate.
“Everything is so strange here,” she said after a moment. “I don't know what to do. I ought to turn back
now, to get home on what money I have left.” She laughed, a sharp humorless bark. “Not that I'll have
much to return to. All my savings are in this venture, and I have no man to help bring in more.”
Alyea ate quietly for a time, considering, then said, “I'm headed south, and I could use a maid,s'a, if
you've the interest in a job.”
The round face brightened. “That would be perfect,s'a ,” Halla said. “I've been a merchant's wife for
most of my life, but I've done my share of serving the wealthy. Would you take me on?”
“I will,” Alyea said.
“I'm so grateful—”
The northern woman's voice stilled as a male tenor interrupted softly, “My lady?”
Alyea turned to look up at the man standing behind her. He wore the colors of the way-stop, grey and
black, and the slash embroidered on his sleeves marked him as a dining-hall servant. A bracelet on his
right wrist ran through a gamut of grey hues, in three rows of precisely-matched beads.
“Yes,s'e ?”
He bowed briefly. “S'eDeiq asks the favor of your presence closer to his hand.”
Startled, she glanced up the table. The big man's brooding dark gaze had fixed directly on her; not the
best of manners but a clear sign that he'd take refusal of the offer poorly.
Don't make him angry, Chac had said.
Alyea stifled an annoyed sigh.
“We'll discuss this more after dinner,” she told the woman. “Wait for me outside when the tables clear, or
speak to Chacerly; he's the oldest man at that table—see?” Reassured by Halla's quick, bobbing nod,
Alyea stood, schooled her expression to neutrality, and walked towards the head of the table.
As she moved, conversations ebbed; heads turned to watch her. Then, politely, the noise resumed. She
sat across from Deiq, inclined her head in greeting, and waited. A fresh plate was placed in front of her
and swiftly filled, along with a clean cup of water and a small goblet of white wine.
“I believe I've seen you before, Lady,” Deiq said once the servants withdrew. “In Bright Bay.”
“I grew up there,” she said.
His eyes narrowed. She smiled and turned her attention to her food.
“What brings you to the Horn?” he asked.
“Scratha.”

Page 53

A thin line of broad teeth showed briefly in a slight smile. “Busy man.”
She gave him the full weight of a direct, emotionless stare for a few seconds, and went back to eating,
leaving the prompt unanswered.
He chuckled. “You're more than Scratha's worth. Come with me instead.”
“I've business with Scratha,” she said without looking up.
“You're not the first,” he said. “Nissa of Sessin went through here wailing over him not long ago.”
She stayed quiet, trying to keep her chewing slower than the sound of her pulse hammering in her ears.
Close up, Deiq wasdisturbing in a way she couldn't quite place. And he seemed to be the only person at
this table not wearing a beaded bracelet; she resisted the urge to study him for other jewelry, not wanting
to give him the wrong impression.
“Mm,” he said after a brief silence. It sounded thoughtful, and she glanced up to see him looking at her
with narrowed eyes. A wider smile than before curved his mouth. The moment showed her that he wore
no earrings or necklaces. “I remember where I've seen you before. You were always wandering about
behind that skinny nothing.”
“Who is now king,” she said without taking offense. Oruenhad been a gangly, unremarkable man until
Chacerly's tutoring had straightened his stance and paced his movements.
“What's the king's woman doing headed down the Horn?”
“Do you call every woman you befriendyours ?” she countered.
“What are you doing headed down the Horn?” he said with no visible annoyance or contrition. His gaze
rested on her thin bracelet of green and white; his lips shifted as though resisting a smile.
Alyea shrugged. “King's business,” she said, and cursed herself silently for answering that way; she'd
intended to say “my business.”
“King's business,” he repeated, and grinned. It wasn't a particularly friendly expression. “Must be
important or he wouldn't have sent such a goodfriend .” When she didn't rise to that bait, he nodded as if
satisfied and said, “You know, you really are far too smart for Scratha. Or for Oruen. You're wasted on
them. I'm headed south in the morning, out to the east road. I'd be honored for you to travel with me,
Lady. I think I'd like to get to know you better.”
She felt a pressure behind her eyes, a velvet not-quite headache.
“I take the King's Road,” she said, wishing she knew a more tactful way to refuse.
“That's a longer way,” he said, “and a harder one. You'll get seasick from all the hills you'll travel over.
The coast road is smoother, and beautiful. And from the lovely port of Stass I can arrange a ship to take
you to Agyaer, no charge, and so much less riding.”
“The King's Road is a shorter way,” she said, not looking at him, “and a neutral road.”

Page 54

“Ah,” he said, as if she'd said a great deal in few words. They finished their food in silence.
The dinner dishes were being cleared away and replaced with bowls of clean sand before he spoke
again. Scooping up a handful of sand and rubbing it briskly between his palms, letting the grains drizzle
onto the floor at his feet, he said, “Do you know what neutrality means, lady?”
She shook her head as she cleaned her own hands, tucking away the thought that he also displayed no
rings on his large hands. Did the lack of decoration mean no status of note—or too much to mention?
She'd have to ask Chac, and hope for a straight answer.
“Neutrality means,” Deiq said, “being a whore to every man while letting him think he's the only one.” He
stood and smiled down at her. “It's a wonderful dance. I look forward to sharing it with you.”
Before she could form a reply, he turned and walked away towards the entrance of the dining hall. After
a moment, when her breath unlocked itself from its hard stop beneath her ribs, she used it to swear:
quietly, but at considerable length.

Chapter Five
The village of Kybeach sprawled, small and smelly, along the edge of marshland. Idisio had heard stories
about this village from fellow thieves who'd wandered down the Coast Road, but somehow their
descriptions of the low-tide funk hadn't quite matched the sheer intensity of the real thing.
Accommodations, he remembered being warned, were low quality at best and rat-havens at worst;
nobody of station stopped here long. And nobody shifty ought to, because Kybeach held a reputation as
the most singularly narrow-minded, hostile village in existence. Although Idisio tried to explain that to
Scratha, the man seemed deaf to reason.
“It'll need chronicled, then,” Scratha snapped when pressed. “Best the king knows what's on his
doorstep, don't you think?”
Idisio shrugged and dropped the argument, hoping the man's attitude would change when they reached
Kybeach; but if anything, the swamp stink seemed to tighten Scratha's resolve.
The only possible word for the stables wasfoul. Scratha, checking at the door, snorted in abrupt fury,
looped the reins over a nearby post, and ordered the startled stable-boy to bring him a muck-rake and
shovel. Idisio, pressed into unwilling service, tied a cloth over his nose to block the worst of the smell and
began to dig out the accumulated filth.
The stable-lad peered at them dubiously and made no move to help. “Merchant Lashnar won' like you
handlin' his mare,” he muttered. “She's pregnant. She's sensitive, you know. He won' like it.”
“Then tell him to come move her outside,” Scratha snapped without turning.
“Yeah, tell him we're busy doingyour job for no damn pay,” Idisio muttered, earning a black glare from

Page 55

the boy, who slouched away with ostentatious indifference.
Not long after that, a determined stride carried in, not a merchant, but a young woman with ash-blonde
hair, bright blue eyes, and an undeniable bounce in certain areas of chest and hip. Idisio, aware of his
sweaty, filthy appearance, grimaced ruefully: probably the only pretty girl in Kybeach and she'd never
look at him twice after this.
“What are you two doing?” she demanded, planting hands on hips and scowling at them. “Baylor's in a
fuss over you pushing him aside and complaining over filth that isn't. . . .”
Her voice trailed off as she caught sight of the piles of stable sweepings near the outer door. Her eyes
widened in disbelief.
“You're never been in these stables, have you,s'a?” Scratha said, straightening. He studied her with a
coolly detached appraisal.
“Not for a while . . . I've been busy helping at the inn. . . .” She edged forward and peered into the
noisome darkness of the stable. “Good gods. It's disgusting! What has he beendoing ?”
“Rough guess, nothing,” Idisio said. She swung a sharp glare at him.
“There's one horse in a half-decent stall,” Scratha said, leaning on his rake. “That'd be the merchant's
mare, I take it? Needs moved. Tell him to come do it.”
Her chin came up, annoyance replaced with determination.
“I'll do it,” she said. “I'm his daughter. You two draw back a bit if you would, please; she's always more
skittish than usual this close to birthing. She ought to have peace and quiet, not be moved around and
aggravated . . . oh, my father's going to beso angry. . . .”
She marched past them, muttering under her breath. After she'd led the gravid mare out of sight, Scratha
resumed working without any comment, but his movements held a renewed ferocity. By the end of the
day the stables were clean, the horses noticeably happier, and Idisio markedly more sour. Scratha, for
his part, had a satisfied, if still dour, expression on his face as they sponged off with the freshly refilled,
much cleaner water of the horse trough.
The stable-boy, who hadn't offered so much as a finger's worth of help all day, crept back into sight,
glaring with a deep resentment.
“You gon' get me fired,” he accused.
“If the mare had foaled in that filth, you'd have lost them both,” Scratha said, lip curling. “Would the
merchant have cared forthat, Baylor?”
The boy blanched, as if Scratha knowing his name were a piece of witchcraft, and slouched to the stable
doors. After a brief look inside, he turned a smoldering glare at them, his resentment no less.
“Outsiders,” he said. “Think you're better'n everyone else.” Scratha shook his head with a snort and
offered no other reply.
“Supper, Idisio,” he said, directing one last brooding glare after the stable-boy, and steered Idisio out of
the stable.

Page 56

Even with windows thrown wide and lanterns lit, the tavern remained a dark and smoky place, little more
than a wide room with a scattering of scarred tables. A serving girl, the attractive lines of her broad face
and generous curves soured by a thoroughly sullen expression, advanced as Scratha and Idisio settled at
a corner table.
“What can I get you?” she demanded. “We got chicken pie, roast gerho, biscuits, an' pot-greens;
long-ale, mead, and red wine.” She recited the list with an air of one put out by the effort it required to
speak.
“That would be fine,” Scratha said serenely.
She stared at him. “What, alla that?”
“Yes,” he said, as if surprised. “There are two of us. I'll have wine with supper, please.” He turned an
inquiring look on Idisio.
“Wine,” the boy said absently, trying to think how to explain to the man what he'd just done.
The girl snorted and swished away indignantly, and Scratha frowned after her. “Did I say something
wrong?”
Hoping that it hadn't been a rhetorical question, Idisio took the opening and said, “I'd guess a pie's
usually split between four people, with maybe a lump of boiled greens thrown in to be generous. For us
to order so much is. . . .” he searched for the right word and finally concluded, “wasteful.”
“Wasteful!” Scratha sat brooding again for a time.
When the girl came back and thumped two heavy wooden mugs of red wine onto the table, he gave her
an intent, searching look. Mistaking his interest, she returned a much kinder look than she'd offered
before, swaying her hip to one side and breathing deeply.
“Your food'll be out soon,” she said in a voice grown suddenly soft. “You're staying at the inn tonight?”
“Yes,” Scratha said, his eyes narrowing, “but I have no need for company, thank you.”
She pouted, her earlier sourness returning instantly, and left them in a huff.
“Wasteful,” Scratha said in a low voice, frowning down at the mug and turning it slowly in his wide hands.
“Is that how you see it, Idisio?”
Idisio hesitated, cautious in his answer.
“I can understand it,” he said at last.
“How can a quarter-pie and a handful of greens be expected to feed a man after a full day's work?”
Scratha demanded. “It's nonsense! It's a child's portion.” He turned one hand over and frowned at a
developing blister.
“I've survived on less,” Idisio answered, hoping that wouldn't remind Scratha of his street-thief origins. It
seemed safer to keep that memory in the deep background of the man's mind.

Page 57

“As have I,” Scratha said, “but that doesn't make it a generous portion to serve to a traveler.”
Idisio shook his head. “These aren't portions like at that palace dinner, Master,” he said. “Most people
don't eat several small courses. They make do with one, so it's a lot bigger. Look—here it comes.”
Gerau stared in disbelief as two servers, each with heavily laden platters, advanced on their table. “That
much difference?” he muttered.
“Yeah,” Idisio said, holding back a grin. “That much difference.”
The servers plunked down the platters and withdrew, leaving the heat of their sullen glares behind with
the food.
One platter held an entire large pie. Around it had been arranged six biscuits, a wide bowl heaped with
pot-greens, and a small bowl of coarse salt. On the other lay the largest roasted haunch of marsh lizard
Idisio had ever seen. The entire creature must have easily weighed over twenty pounds when living.
“Gerho,” Idisio muttered, staring at it. “Wasn't this Ninnic's favorite food?”
“Yes,” Scratha said absently, looking over the food. “I see now that I should have ordered less. I'll
remember that.”
He reached out and tore a chunk of meat free, wiped grease away with a piece of biscuit, and bit in
contentedly. Idisio shuddered and reached for the pie instead.
Some time later, when their appetites were slowing, Idisio said, “The man to the side, over there, has
been watching us since the food arrived.”
“I know,” Scratha said, unalarmed.
Idisio shrugged and returned his attention to the food.
A few moments later, the man rose from his table and approached them openly. He was a tall, thin man
with bony hands and a long face. Bright blue eyes under an untidy mop of blond hair and a tan to his skin
that came from sun, not heritage, marked him as northern-bred at least in part.
“Greetings,s'es,” he said, bowing courteously. “May I join you?”
“Certainly,” Scratha said amiably, motioning to a chair. He seemed completely at ease, very unlike the
nearly hostile, reserved silence he’d displayed at the king’s table.
The man sat down, relaxed and smiling, and cast a glance at the almost empty platter of gerho. “Do you
like the meal?” He caught the server's eye and waved peremptorily, then rubbed his hands together
briskly at her puzzled scowl.
“I do,” Scratha said. “Very filling, and tender meat. The cooks did a fine job with it.”
The serving girl dropped two thick pieces of cloth on the table and retreated without a word.
“You're fond of gerho, then?”

Page 58

“I am. Are you the breeder?” Scratha picked up one of the cloths, tossed the other to Idisio, and began
wiping his hands free of grease.
The man appeared delighted by Scratha's perception. “A man of rare wit, you are,s'e,” he said. “Yes
indeed. Asti Lashnar, humble gerho merchant, at your service. I understand you rescued my prize mare
from dreadful conditions earlier. I'm in your debt.”
“No, you're not,” Scratha said, and changed the subject before the man could protest. “Are all your
gerho so big?”
“Oh, yes,” the merchant said. “I've a pen at the edge of the marsh. Perhaps you'd like to come see them?
I've some over five feet long.”
“Not tonight, thank you,” Scratha said. “Very impressive, that size.”
The man swelled with pride. “They have to be large. I have built a thriving business of these creatures,
supplying them direct to the king's table, no less. The common gerho is simply too small to sustain
profitable dealing. I've bred them for years,s'e , over ten years, and this latest litter is the finest yet.”
“I believe I've seen you in Bright Bay,” Scratha said.
“Indeed, indeed!” the man said. “I've spent quite a bit of time there. I've no doubt you've seen me. In and
out of the king's court, I was, for years. But business . . . is not what it was.”
“King Oruen dislikes gerho?”
“Bitterly,” the man agreed, appearing despondent. “I've tried to gain audience with him, had my own
cook prepare the best dishes possible; no good. And what the king won't eat, the nobles won't touch;
I'm on the edge of ruin, with over two dozen of the beasts left to eat me out of all profit gathered over the
years.”
Idisio, catching the glitter in his master's eye, knew Scratha was tiring of his attempt at gracious
mannerisms. The merchant, unaware of his danger, rattled on.
“I'm looking for a partner, my lord, a man of wit and distinction, refined taste and honesty, who could
help me find a new market. Are you perhaps headed up the road to Isata?”
“Yes,” Scratha said, “but I'm no lord and I'm not interested in hauling along a load of gerho.”
“Oh, no need, no need,” the merchant said quickly, half-laughing. “Perhaps I should have said, rather
than partner, that I seek a sponsor, such as I had at court for many years.”
“Neither will I give you coin to finance your venture,” Scratha said bluntly.
The merchant licked his lips and tried again. “Of course not. Coin isn't the sort of thing a nobleman uses
for arrangements, and you're a noble by your bearing, refuse the title as you will. I can offer . . .
inducements, to sweeten your temper towards an alliance with—”
“What are you offering?” Scratha cut in.
“Something of far more warmth than coin,” the merchant said. “An alliance of great benefit to both of us.

Page 59

My daughter's of age, a fine girl, untouched in any way; you saw her earlier. Perhaps she might suit your
interest.”
Scratha stared at the man for a long moment, expressionless. The merchant returned a nervous smile, his
confidence visibly crumbling around the edges.
“Are you offering me your daughter's hand or sending her for my bed?” Scratha said at last. He sounded
mildly curious, but his dark, desert-hawk stare never lightened.
“She's a good girl,” the merchant started, rallying into indignation.
“Then you're offering her hand,” Scratha interrupted. “You throw your daughter at every noble that
comes through, or am I the first?”
“I resent your implication!” the merchant said, flushed now. “My daughter is pure and untouched!”
“Regardless,” Scratha said. “I'm not noble, and not interested.”
The man's face crumpled a little. “But the potential benefits, my lord,” he said, rallying quickly. “Refusing
this alliance, why, it, it would be as if Saint-King Wezel had turned away the philosophers searching for
the fountain of gold in the center of the Holy Marshes—”
“The world would be a great deal better off if that had happened,” Scratha interrupted. “I'll do without
the salt of theUgly Marshes gladly if it would erase the damage the Northern Church has done over the
years.”
The merchant's blue eyes narrowed sharply.
“I see I mistook your nature,” he said stiffly, and rose. “I apologize for troubling you,s'e.”
Scratha inclined his head in farewell as the merchant marched from the tavern. “Whoremongering fool,”
he said, not lowering his voice. Heads turned in startled, frowning response.
“Master,” Idisio said, his own voice low and urgent, “Pleasedon't talk like that.”
Scratha turned an annoyed stare on his servant. “What, are you suddenly bashful of strong language?”
Idisio drew a breath, spoke with care.
“You're not traveling as a nobleman,” he said, keeping an eye on the people who were staring at them
now. He had a feeling Scratha was used to relatively fair fights, not bar brawls; if any of the men at
nearby tables were good friends with Lashnar, things could get ugly fast. “You don't have protection
against attacks.”
“You worry too much,” Scratha said. “We're still within stone's throw of the outer edges of Bright Bay.
And I can handle any attacks.”
The moment of tension in the tavern passed, and drinkers returned to their ales without more than a
disgusted head-shake. Idisio relaxed a little and turned most of his attention to the conversation with his
master.
“Winning a bar brawl easily would draw questions about who you are,” Idisio pointed out. “A King's

Page 60

Researcher wouldn't be a weaponsmaster, would he?”
“Mmph.” Scratha frowned, considering. “You may be right. Again.” He paused, then added thoughtfully,
“I think you may actually turn out useful after all.”
Idisio resisted the impulse to roll his eyes.
“I'll keep your caution in mind,” Scratha said. He finished scrubbing grease from his hands and dropped
the thick cloth napkin on the table. What had been left on the platters would feed another three men of
average means to bursting, but Scratha clearly had no care for that.
Wasteful, yes, but more than that, a dangerous advertisement of wealth. If Idisio had seen a man like
Scratha walk into a low tavern in Bright Bay and order such a meal, his finger-knives would have been
busy seconds later, and the man's lodging stripped of all wealth within the hour.
At the thought, his stomach turned sour. “I ask your leave,” he said hurriedly. “I need to go find an
outhouse.”
“You don't need permission to piss,” Scratha grumbled, flicking his fingers at the door. “Go, go already.
Good gods. . . .”
The rest of the man's grousing faded from hearing as Idisio almost bolted from the tavern. It took only a
few moments to be at the door to the nearby inn. Brushing past a burly, sour-faced youth just emerging,
he headed for the room they'd booked earlier in the day. Hearing a low whistle as he rounded the corner,
he lunged forward at top speed and caught a girl against the wall as she darted from their room. A woven
basket clattered to the ground as she batted at him.
“I was cleaning,” she said indignantly. “Get your hands off me!”
“Cleaning us out, like,” he said, recognizing her immediately as the merchant's daughter. Up close, the
soft curves he'd admired earlier pressed against him; he tried to shift his grip and stance to avoid
embarrassing himself. He told himself to think of her as nothing more than another street-thief, not one to
trust in any way; that helped cool his blood.
“Are you accusing me of theft?” she demanded.
“Takes one to know one, they say,” he said, baring his teeth in a humorless grin. “Come on, girl, hand it
back and I'll say nothing. I'll even throw in a silver round for your trouble.”
“I have nothing of yours!” she flared.
“And what were you doing in the room, then? It needs no cleaning; we only just arrived.”
“I don't have to answer to you,” she snapped, and began to push at him to release her.
“Then I'll take it to the village elder,” he said. “Or I could mention it to your father, Asti Lashnar the
gerho merchant.”
Her bright blue eyes widened.
“Please don't,” she said, sounding worried. “I swear to you, I have nothing of yours. I was passing by, to
clean another room, and saw the door open. I went in to check that everything was all right, and was just

Page 61

coming out. I saw no signs of theft.”
She looked more frightened than the situation called for, especially given the spirited determination she'd
shown earlier. Judging it to be an act, Idisio shook his head and said, amiably, “Sure. I'll go with that
story, once you give me what you took, and see that you get a reward as well.”
“No,” she said, vexed. “Are you dense? I'm telling you truth.”
With no sound to warn of his approach, Scratha's voice made them both jump. “Is this what you had to
rush away from table for, Idisio?” He sounded amused. “Surely you could have found a different place.
A corner of the stable, perhaps?”
The girl's face flooded with bright and mortified color. Idisio hastily released the girl and stepped back.
“It's not like that—”
“Really,” Scratha said, and moved past into the room. “Your business, then. Just don't wake me, please.”
He closed the door behind him.
Idisio and the blonde girl stared at each other for a moment in horrified silence; then the absurd humor of
the situation prompted him into a reluctant grin.
“He won't say anything,” Idisio assured her.
“Best not,” the girl said firmly. “There's nothing to say. And Idon't have anything of yours. Good night!”
She scooped the basket up, ostentatiously lifted the lid to show Idisio that it was empty, and hurried
away.
He let her go, not seeing any other option than wrestling her to the ground and searching her; the thought
of being that close to her again brought another rush of blood to his face. No, best to let that be. He'd
check to see how much was missing when Scratha was safely asleep and none the wiser; and if it was a
large sum, he'd track the girl down and get it back. A small sum his master would likely never miss, and if
the girl's father ran under as bad a string of ill-fortune as he'd claimed, the girl could use it better than
Scratha.
Idisio waited a few moments, steadying his heartbeat, before stepping into the room. Scratha had already
sprawled, breathing in deeply peaceful sleep, on what passed for a bed here: little more than an
ankle-high wooden support topped with a straw pallet, rough linen covering thrown over and a thin
blanket for chill nights. He'd left the table-lantern lit.
Idisio paused just inside the doorway, pulled the door shut behind him, and examined the room carefully
in the flickering light. He could see signs that their bags had been disturbed, but whether his master had
gone through them before stretching to sleep or a thief had been at them he couldn't tell.
He moved forward, knelt by the untidy pile of bags, and rummaged gingerly through the contents.
Although he could have sworn the bag of coin had been tucked further down in the pack, a judicious
look in the bag showed the right volume of coin inside. If anything had been taken, it had only been one
or two, not more than that; he had a sharp eye for weight and volume.
So the girl had been telling the truth. What had she been doing in their room, then, and why had she come
darting out so quickly at the whistle? Idisio closed up the packs, deciding it wasn't his concern, as long as
his master's money and belongings were intact.

Page 62

Glancing around the room once more, he shook his head at the careless way Scratha had tossed his
clothes over a chair, leaving his money pouch on top without a worry in the world. He'd have to convince
Scratha to let him carry the money.
Idisio grinned. A common pick-thief of the streets of Bright Bay, asking a noble to put a pouch full of
gold and silver in his care? Scratha would be mad to think of it, and even more foolish to refuse. The way
the man spent his coin, he'd lose every silver bit before they crossed the Great Forest.
Idisio tucked Scratha's money pouch into the bags at the foot of the bed, set his boots to one side, laid
out the thin blanket on the floor beside them, and curled himself protectively around the bags.

A noise woke him some time later, a scuffle and a muted cry that had him on his feet and to the window
immediately. Pushing the shutters wide, he saw, in the pale light of a beginning moon, a shadow hurrying
among deeper shadows. It rounded a corner, and the night was still again. Nobody else stirred; possibly
nobody else had heard. If Idisio hadn't been in the lightest of dozes, mistrustful in a strange place, he
likely wouldn't have heard it, either.
He hesitated, staring out into the night, listening for a few more moments. None of his business, he told
himself. If something dodgy was happening out there, he was best in the room with his master, not out
running into the middle of it.
But nobody else seemed to be investigating, and it had sounded like a female voice crying out. His mind
on the blonde girl, Idisio couldn't resist the urge to make sure that whatever the problem, she hadn't been
involved. Baylor seemed the type to take out his dull-witted resentment on anyone weaker, and she'd
brought the news of his neglect to her father; a few ales to fan the flames, and she'd be a prime target.
Idisio slipped from the room and padded, barefoot, towards the outside door. The worn wood of the
floor felt warm and silky underfoot, crisscrossed by rough scars left by dragging heavy objects along the
hallway over the years. Nobody stood at the front desk, nobody seemed to be watching for late-night
arrivals, and the door was unbarred. Idisio eased it open and edged through, letting it close again silently.
The noise had come from the west, the direction their window faced. He hurried towards the edge of the
marsh, taking care to keep to the shadows, ears and eyes alert for any other movement nearby.
The houses thinned out well before the ground grew damp. The leading edge of the wetland lay yards
from the closest home, which Idisio noted sourly had windows only on the eastward side. To the south,
dimly visible, hulked a wide, low-walled enclosure, half in swamp, half on dry ground, with walls that
slanted inwards at their tops. Idisio guessed it to be the gerho pen, and hoped the trail didn't lead there.
Swamp-frogs and crickets chirred, chittered, and squeaked as he advanced slowly, studying the open
ground. Tracking had never been his strength, but in the pale moonlight he saw a flurry of prints in the soft
ground, to and from the village proper, leading into the swamp. He guessed that two, maybe three people
had come and gone this way. One of the prints was light and small, possibly a child's or a woman's foot.
Another had broad toes and a heavy tread, and the third looked long and narrow, leaving little more
depth to its print than the smallest had. All had been barefoot; not surprising on a warm night, especially if
stealth was required.

Page 63

Lovers sneaking off to spend time together? Idisio couldn't conceive of any romance enduring the stench
that hung over the black mud. He hesitated again. Itreallywasn't any of his business. But if it had been
nothing more than that, judging by the silence, he'd find nothing, and be reassured, whereas if he went
back now, he knew he'd never get to sleep.
Curiosity had gotten his nose skinned before, but now as always, he couldn't resist finding out more.
Two lovers, maybe, but there were three sets of prints made recently, which made a lover's meeting
unlikely. If it had been a struggle, there might have been a rape, two on one; that thought sent his blood
boiling and his feet moving forward again recklessly.
Following the tracks, he found, to his surprise, that although the ground did soften considerably, the
oozing mud and water stayed to either side, not in front. The path rose and firmed further, until the tracks
vanished in an area filled with springy marsh-grass. Idisio wasn't skilled enough, by dim moonlight, to
make sense out of broken leaves or stems. He stood in the knee-high grass helplessly, looking around.
He saw the slightest shadow of an opening to one side, where the taller reeds all around had been
pushed aside hard enough or often enough to acquire a permanent lean. It was the only possible path he
could see, and he moved towards it cautiously, suddenly mindful of marsh snakes and pinching beetles.
He silently called himself a fool for setting bare feet here at night.
But someone else had, and recently; he could only hope that they had scared away anything dangerous
in the nearby area. And something urged him on, more than curiosity: something verging on the disturbing
intuition he'd followed all his life.
The ground past the bent reeds continued firm underfoot and within a few steps opened up into a kind of
rough clearing wide enough that several steps would cross it. Surrounded by tall cattail reeds and
fluffberry bushes, clumps of towering silver grass, and even a wrinkled, tangled blackthorn tree, it was a
cozy enough spot for privacy if one could ignore the stink.
A crumpled form lay in the middle of the cleared area, and the paleness of blonde hair stood out even in
the dim light from a thin moon. Sucking in a hard breath, he scrambled to her side and dropped to his
knees, reaching out to touch her gingerly.
“S'a ?” he said, hoping for breath, for movement, for tears. She lay too still. Touching her throat,
something felt wrong; moving his hand up slowly, he found her head twisted at an awkward angle, warm
blood still oozing from a vicious cut on her lower left jaw.
When his fingers encountered that wetness, he jerked back, breathing hard, and hurriedly wiped his
hand on nearby grass. Nausea heaved through his stomach. He knew death when he saw it.
Moments later, he was on his feet and sprinting back through the marsh, wanting to put as much distance
between him and the body as possible. At the edge of the marsh, he paused, undecided—should he rush
to rouse the town or get himself to safety? By the time the girl was even missed it might be late tomorrow,
and he could be miles down the road with Scratha. Idisio knew, from stories more traveled thieves had
told, that Kybeach always looked first to outsiders for crimes. Deciding at last that crying for help would
be too risky, he started back to the inn, determined to press his master into leaving at first light if at all
possible.
“What's that?” a voice called out, and a hand-lantern slotted open, light falling on Idisio, fixing him where
he stood. “Who's this?”

Page 64

Idisio stood, frozen in sudden panic, staring at the wavering light as the man approached. “Good eve,s'e,”
he said idiotically.
The bobbing light revealed an old man, wrinkled by sun and salt and poverty. He peered at Idisio
suspiciously. “Who're you, boy, and what do you wandering around the marsh at midnight?”
“I couldn't sleep,” Idisio said. “I like to walk when I can't sleep.”
The man grunted, sharp dark eyes sweeping Idisio from head to foot. “You like walking in the marshes at
night? Dangerous thing to do. Quicksand not far out there, and we've had problems with marsh asps of
late.”
Idisio glanced down at his feet; they were muddy enough, even though he'd been on largely dry ground,
to make the observation undeniable.
“I didn't go far,” he said, feeling a light sweat break out across his whole body.
“Quicksandshifts , boy,” the man said severely. “At times it's right at the edge of the village, you know.”
Idisio doubted that, from what little he knew of marshland, but wasn't about to stand out here and argue
with an old man bent on impressing him.
“I won't do it again,s'e ,” he said. “I didn't realize it was that dangerous.”
His position had become even more tenuous, now that someone had seen him out here at night. It would
be only his word against the village that he had nothing to do with the girl's death. He considered
confessing to what he'd found; but the old man's suspicious gaze didn't give him confidence that his story
would be in any way believed. Of all the people to confide in, this would likely be the worst: an old
curmudgeon who wandered the village at night, peering and prying to see what wrong he could catch
people in.
He let out a long breath of relief when the man, with only the barest courtesy, turned away and shambled
off in another direction. Abandoning stealth, Idisio sprinted for the safety of the inn—
And landed face-down not far from the door he'd been aiming for, his hands catching the weight just
before his nose slammed into the ground. His sore wrist screamed a sharp reminder of two days ago. It
took Idisio a moment to realize he'd been tripped. The understanding was helped by a large form that
bulked over him, shouting: “Here's a thief who’s been roaming the town while we sleep!”
“No,” Idisio panted, rolling painfully to a sitting position, “no, I just— ”
“You outsiders, you're all alike,” the person standing over him said. Idisio guessed his attacker older than
himself, but somewhat less than a full-grown man. Imposingly built, broad-shouldered and dark, he
wasn't someone Idisio would care to wrestle. Another moment gave recognition: he'd brushed by the boy
hours before, on his way into the inn to check their belongings.
A faint aroma came from the large boy, but Idisio was too distracted to put name to smell.
“A thief! A thief!” the large boy shouted again. “Wake up, wake up!”
“No,” Idisio said desperately, and started to get up. A solid poke from a meaty hand put him quickly

Page 65

back on the ground again. The boy's breath in his face clarified the mysterious smell: wine. Probably quite
a lot of it, by the slight sway in his stance.
In a rush of footsteps, people emerged sleepily into the road.
“What's this, what's this?” voices said in ragged chorus, like a flock of seagulls crying after scraps, and
light pooled around them from lanterns, candles, and torches. “What's going on here?”
“I found him sneaking around,” the big youth said, swelling proudly. “I don't see why any honest man has
business sneaking around at night.”
“Why wereyou out, then?” Idisio retorted, and earned a black glare for the words.
“I have work to do,” the youth sneered. “I'm watching merchant Lashnar's mare now.”
“True,” said a voice. Asti Lashnar stepped forward, his blond hair tumbled in sleepy disarray around his
face. “Is she all right, Karic? Were you shouting something about her?”
“No, the mare's fine,” the boy assured him quickly. “I stepped out for some fresh air, and saw this one
sneaking about. When I saw him sprinting back here like a demon snapped at his heels I knew he'd done
something wicked and I had to stop him.”
No way out of it now. As soon as they realized the girl's absence, they'd lay it all at his hand, and Scratha
might or might not believe any protests at that point.
“I heard a noise,” Idisio said, “and I went out to find what caused it.”
The old man from the edge of the village arrived in time to hear that, hobbling with surprising speed, his
eyes gleaming at the promise of mischief ahead.
“You told me you couldn't sleep,” he croaked maliciously. “Story changes now, do it? Funny that
nobody else hear this noise, hah?”
“He's lying again,” the older boy said positively. “Master Lashnar, is your daughter safe within the inn? I
don't see her here.”
The gerho merchant, as if startled, looked around. “That's odd. She was supposed to be working the
front desk of the inn, for night arrivals. She should have been first out when you shouted. Perhaps she's
out checking on the gerhoi.” He sounded dubious.
“I bet he lured her out,” the dark-haired boy said. “I saw him staring at her, earlier in the day. And he's
been in the marsh—look at his feet!”
“I found him just having come out of the marsh,” the old man croaked, excited now. “He admitted
wandering about out there!”
“No,” Idisio said, desperately trying to regain the chance to speak. “No, I went to find out about the
noise—”
“Likely story,” the gerho merchant bellowed, enraged now. “What did you do with my daughter?”

Page 66

“Excuse me,” Scratha said, moving people firmly out of his way as he advanced through the crowd.
Unlike the others around him, he was fully dressed, even to the boots, giving him an undeniable air of
authority. The babble of voices fell silent and people moved out of his way.
“Idisio? What's going on?”
“He's lured my daughter into the swamp and done something foul with her!” the gerho merchant cried,
lunging forward to grab at Idisio's shirt. With a swift movement, Scratha held the man back.
“Let the boy speak, please,” Scratha said, forcefully enough to quiet even the furious merchant. “Idisio?”
“I heard a noise, and I went looking for what caused the noise, and I found her,” Idisio said, all in a rush.
“It's the blonde girl, the merchant's daughter, I don't know her name, she's in the swamp, she's dead,
someone's killed her andit wasn't me! ”

By the time the arguing had died out and the relevant people—most of the village, it seemed—had
gotten dressed and ready to trek across damp muddy ground, the sky had greyed towards dawn. The
gerho merchant had wanted to rush straight out to see for himself what had happened, dragging Idisio by
the ear if need be, but more sensible people held him back.
“It's too dark yet,” said some, “we'll be sure to step on marsh asps and stinger beetles. Wait until there
are more of us, with more light.”
“Hemade it out and back, a stranger to the marshes yet,” the merchant replied sourly. Only Scratha's flat
refusal to allow Idisio to move from his side turned the issue. Lashnar stormed away to dress and didn't
return for some time.
Scratha and Idisio went back into the taproom of the inn, followed by a suspicious crowd that seemed
intent on keeping them in plain sight. Scratha said little as they sat and waited; Idisio said nothing.
Nobody spoke to them.
Asti Lashnar's face had a tinge as grey as the sky, and his breath shared the same wine-stink that Karic's
had borne, as they finally trooped across the open ground, following Idisio's directions.
“See,” Idisio said as the ground began to soften underfoot, “see, the tracks. . . .” He stopped, staring in
dismay.
The soft ground had been thoroughly trampled by someone or something; the tracks had been completely
overridden.
“Convenient,” Scratha said in Idisio's ear. The boy nodded glumly.
“So much for your proof,” the merchant snorted, looking at the muddy chaos, then gestured imperiously
to Idisio. “Show me my daughter, boy.”
Scratha laid a hand on Idisio's shoulder and propelled him forward. Idisio stopped at the edge of the
swamp, searching doubtfully in the muddy ground for the path he'd used before.

Page 67

“Having second thoughts, boy?” the old watchman sneered, pushing close. “Feeling that rope around
your neck?”
“Watchman,” Scratha said, “another word and my hands will be aroundyour neck. Be still.”
“Here,” Idisio said hastily, stepping forward and prodding at the ground with a toe. “Yes. Here.” He
glanced at the gerho merchant. “It's a narrow path; I don't think two aside can walk it. Follow me,
please,s'e , and step where I step only.”
“The whole village need not attend,” Scratha added. “S'eLashnar is the only one involved out of your
village, and I will go as the boy is my servant. The rest of you, stay here.”
Something in his voice drowned, stillborn, any protests.
As they picked their way through the swamp, the back of Idisio's neck kept prickling. Visions of the
enraged gerho merchant's hands wrapping around his neck kept distracting him. He wouldn't dare, Idisio
kept telling himself. Even so, he took great care to stand well out of Lashnar's reach when they reached
the small clearing.
Lashnar moved forward like a man in a dream, kneeling beside his daughter, and stared for some time
without touching the body. Scratha moved forward as well, just as slowly; but his attention stayed fixed
on the ground, and he walked all the way around the edge of the clearing before turning his attention to
the girl.
“Don't touch that,” he said sharply, as the merchant reached forward towards something on the body that
Idisio couldn't see.
The merchant looked up, all belligerence gone, a sick and dreadfully pale look to his face. “Why not?”
“Let me look first,” Scratha said. He urged the merchant to his feet and nudged him aside before
squatting to examine the body himself.
The grey light of the sky now flushed towards true dawn, and the chirping of the crickets gave way to the
wake-up calls of swamp birds. Rat flies, bite-bugs, and tiny flying roahas stirred their translucent wings
and flitted about. Idisio, standing still, numb and exhausted, felt as if he had stepped into a timeless
moment of unreality. The merchant stood with a blank look on his face, hands hanging limp at his sides,
staring at his daughter's body.
Finally breaking his motionless examination, Scratha stretched out a slow hand and removed a dagger
from the girl's stomach. After wiping the blade clean on the dew-damp ground beside him, he stood and
turned a bleak look on the two watching him.
“Her neck might be broken, from the punch that laid her to the ground,” he said, “but what probably
killed her was this.”
He held up the dagger. Even in the dim light, Idisio could see the ebony handle and slim blade of one of
his lord's throwing knives.

Page 68

Chapter Six
“You told me not to make him angry,” Alyea said reasonably.
“You did worse,” Chac said, his jaw hardening further. “You intrigued him. Now he'll tag our heels to
find out what we're up to.”
Alyea sighed and resisted the impulse to look over her shoulder. That morning, Deiq of Stass had
sauntered up with a broad grin to announce he would be traveling with them. He'd bowed with perfect
grace, smiling amiably in the face of Chac's glower, and had taken himself to the back of Alyea's group.
So far, he'd stayed there, showing no interest in speaking with anyone.
“At least I have a maid now,” she said, hoping to divert Chac's annoyance. They'd given Halla one of the
pack mules and redistributed the load, ignoring the woman's protests that she'd be fine walking. “Aren't
you happy about that?”
“Iwas ,” he said, “until I found out you'd more or less invitedhim along as well.”
“What makes him so dangerous that you're frothing over him being at our tail?” she demanded.
He slanted a hard frown at her. “Sometimes a bit of silk would go better than salt, you know,” he said.
“Just answer the question.”
He grunted and shook his head, then said, “Deiq of Stass is a little bit of everything: merchant, socialite,
explorer. He's been to every port, east and west, even Terhe and Sand.”
“Terhe?” Alyea said, impressed. “That's a dangerous voyage.”
The old man stared straight ahead, his face grim again. “Deiq uses his wealth to buy land. That's not such
an easy thing, past the Horn. You have to get agreement from every village master and desert lord within
a hundred land miles of the edges of the land you've chosen. That's expensive, and damned difficult.”
“How much land has he bought?” she asked.
“One estimate I heard,” the old man said, “is that overall it works out to a little over twice the size of
Bright Bay.”
Alyea had stood on the highest tower of the palace and surveyed the vast, sprawling city beneath her;
twice that size was a staggering amount of land for one man to own.
“What does hedo with the land?” she said. “How was he ever allowed to own so much?”
“He turns it into farms,” Chac said. “If you've eaten fresh fruit or vegetables over the last few years, it's
likely they've come from Deiq's land. How he was allowed—he's a persuasive man, and held out a
benefit that everyone could appreciate: money. And a few other things, I think.”
She wasn't about to let him leave it there. “Like what?”

Page 69

“Possibly drugs; there are rumors he has connections to Darden and F'Heing. But I think he uses physical
charms to enthrall people into giving him what he wants. He's seduced at least two village masters into
granting him land rights that I'm sure of, and he's not picky; one was male.”
Alyea raised a skeptical eyebrow. “I don't believe a man can play that game.”
Chac shook his head. “Women aren't the only ones who know the art. He's quiet about it, but I'm fairly
sure he's bedded his way through noble ranks from Bright Bay to Terhe. If he were a woman I'd call him
a whore.”
“Sounds like he'd give the northern s'iopes a heart attack,” Alyea said, a sour taste in her mouth, then
remembered the comment the big man had made at dinner the night before. “He names himself a whore;
says that's what neutrality means.”
“Does he,” Chac said, unsurprised. “He's as neutral as it gets, then. Here's something for you to think on:
the wife of Sessin's new Head of Family, Lord Antouin Sessin, just happens to be Pieas's mother. Her
eye wanders when her husband's out of sight, and there's rumor she was pregnant before marrying
Antouin. I have to think Lord Sessin knows about his lady's indiscretions; it seems no secret. But for
some reason there's no open notice made of it. Deiq's been a visitor there for years, and there's some
quiet speculation as to who Pieas's father really is—but it's risking your life to say that openly.”
Alyea felt her stomach roll unpleasantly. “Gods.”
“Indeed,” the old man said. “You've caught the eye of a desert asp, Alyea. If Pieas is Deiq's son—well.
You could find yourself strung up as a witch, called out as a whore, or sold off as a slave. The king's
authority is thin, down here, and by the time he even heard of your troubles it would be far too late.”
Alyea glanced back nervously, looking for Micru. He was still walking with the guards.
“We'll protect you,” Chac said, following her gaze, “best we can, but we can't ward you from yourself,
Alyea. If you ever find yourself alone with Deiq of Stass, you can be sure it's not from lack of attention
on our part.”
Alyea swallowed hard, her face flaming. “I'm not that much a fool, Chac.”
“You've been acting it,” he said. “I'm glad you're starting to see sense finally. Find a way to lose Deiq's
interest.Fast .”

The setting sun gilded the buildings as the traveling party entered the second way-stop between Bright
Bay and Water's End. This one was larger, and the public space sprawled along a relatively flat stretch of
land with a stable, an inn, a separate tavern, and a few small shops. All the long, low buildings were built
of a chunky, dull red-grey brick that could only have come from brickroot fields.
The tiny, wide-leafed brickroot plant had a tenacious root system that dug through the harshest clay soil,
binding it so tightly that one could literally slice chunks from such ground, remove the surface part of the
plant, set the hard dirt in the hot sun to cure, and a week later, use them for bricks. Constituting a

Page 70

major—and profitable—Horn industry, any flat surface was generally farmed to support the stubby little
plant. Alyea had heard that there were villages whose overall elevation had dropped several feet over the
years, from the constant brickroot farming.
This way-stop seemed no exception. They passed several wide, carefully fenced-off areas filled with
brickroot plants. The buildings stood notably higher than the brickroot fields; some had ramps or stairs
leading up to their front doors. The ground around those buildings looked as if it had been carved away
over the years for brick. It gave the community a ragged, poverty-stricken appearance that the worst
parts of Bright Bay would have been hard pressed to beat.
The stench of a garbage pit greeted them as they rode past the first outbuildings. By the time they
reached the inn, Alyea's mood had gone as sour as the air. She wasn't cheered by the discovery that
she'd be sharing a room, not only with Halla, but with strangers as well; far less selective than the first rest
stop, this one mixed nobles and commoners in its small rooms without hesitation. Alyea's room held four
narrow, low beds, which were little more than straw-stuffed sacks on brick bases.
Halla had insisted on taking care of Alyea's horse as well as her own, and Alyea put up little argument
over the matter, too tired to even think clearly. She dropped both packs on an empty bed and looked
around, meeting the gaze of a thin young woman perched on the edge of another bed.
Remembering Chacerly's admonition that anyone here could be important, she pushed aside her foul
mood and offered pleasant greetings to the young woman, who wore northern clothes and a petulant
frown.
To her surprise, the girl responded, in a distinctly northern accent, “Oh, good gods, I'm gladsomeone's
talking to me at last! I'd always thought southerners were polite, but nobody's said aword to me in days.
Sorry, I'm chattering. No offense intended.”
“None taken,” Alyea said cautiously, studying the young girl. Probably not above fifteen; and her
northern accent absolutely didn't fit a face and body that a desert lord's by-blow would have been proud
of.
“I'm Gria,” the girl said with a wide smile; then, as if guessing Alyea's thoughts: “From Isata. Cousin to
the Marq; second, third, I'm not entirely sure. My mother could probably tell you to the last drop of
Isatain blood, but I'm lousy with bloodlines.”
Alyea found herself smiling at young Lady Gria's brash cheer. “Alyea of Bright Bay. Cousin at some
remove to one of the royal bloodlines. Second, third, maybe eighth; I can never remember. What brings
you to the Horn, if it isn't too rude to ask?”
“Not at all,” Gria said. “I'm getting married. Or at least, that's what my mother hopes. There's a desert
lord looking for a wife to his son and contacts into a northern family of rank, and my mother loves the
idea of the influence and bragging rights she'd gain through that, so we set out to be part of the grand
auction. I've been harangued every step of the way so far on the proper way to throw myself at the feet
of a desert lord. Tell me, is it anything like groveling before a s'iope?”
“Nothing at all like that,” Alyea said, frowning.
“I was afraid of that,” Gria said with a mock sigh. “Well, maybe it won't be a complete disaster. Then
again, maybe I should pray that it is. I don't know that I'm ready for marriage just yet.”

Page 71

“Don't you get a choice in the matter? I thought Isata was fairly liberal.”
“Oh, it is,” Gria said. “But my mother isn't. She's devoted to the Northern Church, follows their every
whim. My father was more reasonable, but he died a few years back, and it's just not worth the strain to
fight her on most things. At least marrying will get me away from her.”
Alyea glanced at the last bed, which showed no signs of even having been sat on, although two
carry-bags sat neatly beside it.
“She's off praying,” Gria said. “She prays for an hour before every meal, and an hour after the meal, and
every other time she can get on her knees. I refuse to do that, which drives her wild, but thatis a battle
I'm willing to fight. My knees just won't take it.” She drew a breath. “I was forbidden to leave the room
without her, but I think she'd make an exception if I had a cousin to the royal family at my side. We don't
need to mention the word 'distant,' do we?” She grinned hopefully, dark eyes wide.
Alyea laughed. “They'll be ringing the gong for dinner soon,” she said. “Let's go get some decent seats.”

“Not even a proper shrine to the Four. It's a disgrace, after all the s'iopes have done for the southlands. I
actually had to kneel on bare dirt, can you believe it? Dirt! Like some heathen.”
Alyea tried not to roll her eyes. Sela, a small, bony woman with wideset, prominent eyes and high
cheekbones prone to flush with emotion, had descended upon them moments after the gong. She'd
sputtered furiously at Gria for leaving the room until Alyea was introduced, then spent a few moments
almost fawning before dropping into a seat and a diatribe at roughly the same time.
Her voice had been steadily rising. Heads turned, frowns appeared. “My lady,” Alyea said, very aware
that she didn't want her face connected with this kind of talk, “it's not wise to speak like that here. Please,
keep your voice down, at the very least; better not to speak of religion at all.”
“I'm on kingdom soil,” the woman declared, “and protected by kingdom law.”
“Kingdom law needs kingdom guards to enforce,” Alyea said brutally. “You see any here? I don't.
Please, let's speak of something else.”
The woman looked around for a moment, seeming rather startled.
“They wouldn'tdare ,” she said, more quietly.
“My lady,” Alyea said, “trust me. You're a long way from kingdom law right now, whatever the
boundary maps may say. And moving further every day.” She paused, then decided to risk voicing the
question. “If you disapprove of the southlands so much, why accept an offer of marriage to a
southerner?”
“Oh, he follows the Four,” she said. “He's a good man, an honest man, I was told.”
“Who told youthat ?” Alyea said. The notion of any desert lord following the gods of the Northern
Church was beyond absurd. “And what is this desert lord's name?”

Page 72

“Why,machagoIerie told us,” she said. “He's a matchmaker. He said Gria was the most promising match
he'd found, and begged leave to escort her to the lord right away. . . .” Her voice trailed off at the
expression on Alyea's face. “What's the matter with that?”
“Is Ierie traveling with you?” Alyea asked, trying to keep her tone level.
“Yes, of course,” the woman said. “He's over there, with the guards; he's the one with the heavy pox
mark on his left cheek.”
Alyea lifted her gaze to the man indicated and realized he'd been watching them. They stared at each
other for a long moment; then the man's lip curled into a sneering smile. He looked away, leaning over to
whisper something in the ear of the man seated to his left. There were five guards seated around Ierie, all
dark, flat-faced deep southerners, muscled and scarred.
A chill shivered down Alyea's back as Ierie straightened and stared at her again, speculation in his gaze
now. She hesitated, weighing the risk, then decided Chac and Micru could protect her from any reprisals
Ierie might aim her way.
“My lady Sela,” she said quietly, “I don't know much of the old language, but I know that word.
Machago does not mean matchmaker, it means slave-master. Those guards are not there to protect you.
They are there to keep you and your daughter from running away. Did you sign anything?”
The woman stared at her in blank horror. “I . . . what . . . well, yes, but . . . that's absurd! It was only a
contract that he would escort us, that we wouldn't choose someone else as a guide.”
“Did your daughter sign anything? What language was it written in?”
“The same contract,” the woman said, drawing herself up and looking offended. “Of course it was in the
desert lord's native tongue, but our s'iopes assured me it was a clear and legitimate document and I could
sign it with no worries. Machago Ierie was their guest while in Isata. He's a good man; he gave generous
donations to our church while he stayed with us.”
Alyea resisted the impulse to drop her head in her hands and growl in frustration. Generous donations?
More likely bribes. But she knew better than to say that aloud.
“My lady,” she said carefully, “desert lords do not send servants to the northlands to find pretty young
ladies of desirable family for their sons. Every desert lord I have ever known—” Which consisted, at this
point, of Eredion Sessin, but Sela didn't need to know that. “—would have to be threatened with
imminent death to even consider the notion, and would likely choose death. You are not taking your
daughter to a potential betrothal; you are taking her to be sold. And quite likely you will be beside her.”
“That's impossible,” the woman said, the flush along her cheekbones a bright crimson now.
Her daughter's face had, in contrast, been growing steadily whiter.
“Oh, dear gods,” Gria said, hardly more than a breath.
“Don't you listen to her! I don't know what game you're trying to play, young lady,” the older woman
snapped, “but I'll tell you this: I'll trust my s'iopes' word over yours. They are the favored of the gods;
they cannot lie.”

Page 73

“My lady,” a familiar voice drawled behind them. “Do me the honor of sitting with me? They're about to
start serving the food.” Deiq smiled down at her, darkly handsome and completely implacable.
Alyea let a breath hiss through her teeth and considered the merits of refusing him flat out; but open
hostility wouldn't help, and she was glad of the chance to get away from this stupid northern woman and
her doomed daughter. She rose from her seat, nodded goodbye to the flustered women, and followed
him to the head of the table.
Deiq didn't press her with conversation until after the food had been served and she had eaten several
bites. Instead, he watched her thoughtfully, his dark gaze unreadable.
“It's unusual,” he said at last, “for a slave merchant to allow his purchases to sit at a noble table.”
Alyea paused and set the food back on her plate, feeling suddenly ill. “They don't know yet. The mother
thinks she's on her way to a marriage auction for a southern desert lord.”
“You tried to tell them.” It wasn't a question.
She nodded and glanced down the table at the women being discussed. The mother was eating rapidly,
still looking indignant; the girl stared at her food, picking at it slowly. “The mother doesn't believe me. The
girl does.”
“Interfering with a machago can be dangerous,” Deiq said. “There's a reason he hasn't told them yet.
There's a reason they're allowed to think they're still free nobles. I wonder what it could be?” His gaze
went to the side table where the slave-merchant and his guards sat.
“Easier to transport willing victims,” she said.
His dark gaze returned to her face. “Very true. Once again, I'm impressed, Lady Alyea. You are a rare
one.”
She almost groaned. Acting stupid might have lost his interest. Too late now.
He smiled. “Your advisors don't want you to have anything to do with me, yes?”
She bit her lip and resisted the impulse to cast a beseeching glance at Chac. He couldn't help her. “Yes.”
“Ah.” He smiled and turned his attention to his food for a while. At last he said, “This northern woman.
Who is she?”
“Lady Sela and her daughter Gria. Cousins, I think, to Isata's Marq at some remove.”
“I know that line. Yes.” He smiled as if at some private joke. “I understand what's going on now. How
interesting.”
He went on eating placidly, and Alyea picked at her food and fought against asking the obvious question.
Deiq just as obviouslywanted her to ask, to need something from him. She knew the game, and wasn't
playing. The northern woman was nothing but another damn fool who trusted her stupid Church too
much; a shame, and sad, but it wasn't the first time this had ever happened, and wouldn't be the last.
Alyea had a job to do and it didn't involve rescuing stupid northerns. Chac would be beyond furious if

Page 74

she even tried, especially with Deiq's eye on her. Best to keep silent.
Deiq seemed to accept the quiet. He said nothing more the rest of the meal. As the dishes were cleared
from the table, he cast her an amused glance and said, “Thank you for this conversation, my lady. It was
most enjoyable.” He scrubbed the cleaning sand briskly between his hands, rose, and strolled away.

“I tried, Chac, I swear,” she said the next morning, as the old man glowered at her.
“He's still at our tail,” the old man said. “You must not have tried very hard.”
Alyea ground her teeth and resisted a strong urge to justify and defend herself—time to start taking some
control before she turned into a puppet. She searched for a suitable rebuke, a sharp enough comment to
set the old man in his place, and came up empty.
They rode in silence for a while. Alyea's annoyance slowly evaporated in the warming air. The mist that
had greeted them in the morning burned away reluctantly, leaving the faintest of hazes behind for a while;
then that vanished, and the dew that clung to the increasingly shrubby plants around them disappeared as
well.
The ground still sloped noticeably upward. Ragged rock faces rose and fell around them like madly
tossed crates. The path itself was relatively smooth, heavily traveled and worn underfoot, but narrowed in
many places to allow no more than the width of a cart to pass. At one such spot, Alyea happened to be
looking up at a long needle scrub pine that seemed to be growing out of a tall cliff to one side—and saw
movement where there should have been stillness.
“Chac,” she said, trying not to sound panicked.
“Don't look,” he said, not moving his eyes from the path before them. “It's offensive.”
She took her eyes from the thin man in grey-patterned clothes who seemed to be hanging, unsupported,
against the side of the rock face above them. He blended into the lichen and scrub-covered rock
perfectly; if he hadn't moved just as Alyea looked up, she never would have spotted him.
“Who is he?”
“They,” Chac said, in a quiet, correcting tone, “are theteyanain . Singular,teyanin. The watchers of the
Horn. They guarantee the neutrality of the path we're on.”
Alyea swallowed, feeling a chill run along her arms. “I thoughtteyaninmeant some sort of desert demon,”
she said. “My nurse used to threaten me that the teyanain would come get me if I told a lie.”
Her childhood imagination had painted an image of monsters twenty feet tall that breathed flames and
carried barbed whips in both hands. Now that she thought about it, that seemed a rather similar image to
the one the northern s'iopes called up when talking about their gods. Chac nodded, still looking straight
ahead. “Teyanin could be loosely translated as 'desert dread.' They were the arbitrators and enforcers of
the desert; the keepers of the old laws. When the tribes split, the majority of the teyanain went south. As
the kingdom developed, the remaining teyanain found a place for themselves in the Horn. They don't have
the authority in the kingdom that they did in the desert, but they hold absolute rule along this road. That's

Page 75

why this road is safe—and why it's dangerous. As long as you hold your peace, you're safe, but start any
kind of squabble or fight here and you'll be cut down from above without remorse or question.”
Alyea resisted the urge to look up again. “How many are there?”
“Nobody knows,” Chac said. “Best guess, two or three thousand. It's never been a large tribe, and
they're particular about who marries into it, and who has access to their villages.” He paused, glanced
sideways at her. “Took you long enough to notice them. I thought you'd pick up on them yesterday.”
She stared at him, openmouthed; he shrugged and looked back at the road ahead.
“We passed four yesterday, and the one you finally noticed was the second today,” he said. “And for
every one you see, there's likely four or five more, hidden better. They don't mind being seen, every so
often, just as a reminder that they're there, but don't make the mistake of staring.” She reflexively started
to look up; stopped herself just in time and stared hard at her horse’s ears until the urge passed.
“Gods,” she said at last, badly shaken.
Chac grunted and said nothing. They rode for a time in silence. Alyea noticed that the group was
unusually subdued, and when she looked over her shoulder, her men all had their eyes straight ahead,
their shoulders stiff and tense. Only Micru seemed completely at ease, but still showed a reluctance to
survey the area as he normally did. “They know,” she said, looking back to Chac.
“Of course they do,” the old man said a bit tartly. “Every one of the men with you has been through the
Horn, along every road there is, more than once. Did you think you'd be given fools?”
“What happens when someone who doesn't know comes through here?” Alyea asked. “Like those
northerns?” She'd told Chac about them the night before, after dinner; as expected, he'd dismissed them
as fools and told her to leave them to their doom.
“They make allowances,” he said. “But they've seen the men here before, and they have good memories.
They won't be making allowances for any of us except you; and given that you're surrounded by men
who do know better, that leeway will be very short.”
“Why haven't I been told any of this before?” she demanded, suddenly angry. “I grew up in the king's
court and never heardanything of what I've learned the last few days!”
“The politics you grew up with have to do with the northlands,” Chac said. “Not the desert. Most
northerns prefer to forget anything exists past Bright Bay, and the desert lords like being left alone, so
they encourage that.”
Alyea shook her head, brooding.
“How am I going to do this?” she said at last. “I thought I knew something about the desert lords. Now I
feel like a child waddling into a bonfire.”
“About time you figured that out,” Chac said dryly. “That's exactly what you are.”
Her earlier resentment and anger returned. “And you're to keep me from burning myself?” she snapped.
“You'd do better at that if you talked more about what I'm walking into, don't you think?”

Page 76

“Thought you'd never ask,” he said.
“Ask?”
“First thing you need to learn,” he told her, unaffected by her anger. “You don't assume anyone's going to
help you, here. You ask, and you acknowledge that even the asking puts a debt on you, whether or not
you get the help you're after.”
She glared at him. He kept his gaze to the front, serene, even smiling a little.
“You're being paid by the king to help me,” she said.
“But you're the one directly benefitting from it,” he replied. “There's your first lesson in desert logic. What
the king is paying for is my guiding you to the Scratha fortress, and a willingness to help you learn. You
acquire your own debt every time you ask for advice or help.”
“Lunacy,” she said.
“If you don't learn that lesson,” he said, “the rest are useless, and so are you.”
She turned a fierce glare to the front, staring at outcrops of rock and unoffending scrubby brush, chewing
her tongue against the curses crowding her throat.Breathe in. Breathe out . The lessons of aqeyva nudged
at her mind.Breathe. Focus on the breath. Let everything go, just for a moment, and focus. Focus.
Breathe.
After a while, she let out a long, slow, controlled sigh and nodded. “I would be deeply in your debt,s'e
Chacerly of Bright Bay,” she said very quietly, very steadily, “if you would be so kind as to instruct me as
you think best.”
“Well spoken, if rather broad,” he said. “Better to define the terms more closely, or you'll find yourself
serving as a pleasure-girl in a noble's brothel.”
Breathe. Focus. Breathe.She must not lose her temper, must not haul off and knock the old bastard off
his horse. Her mind stayed blank. Everything she came up with sounded worse than her first attempt.
“I don't think I know how to ask,” she said finally.
Chac let out a sigh. “NowI think we can get somewhere.”

Chapter Seven
Scratha waited until he and Idisio were in their room with the door shut before allowing his anger to
surface. Idisio dodged out of the way as his master's hand shot out.
“I didn't,” he said quickly, putting some space between them. “I swear, Master, I didn't kill her.”

Page 77

Scratha advanced, angling to trap Idisio in a corner. Judging that avoiding him again would only make
matters worse, Idisio let himself be steered back against the wall. He allowed the man to get in one heavy
blow, then sagged to the ground with an arm raised defensively. It seemed to ease Scratha's temper; he
stepped back and stared down at Idisio.
“You stole my knives,” Scratha said. “Where's the other one?”
“I didn't!” Idisio protested, peering over the top of his arm. His cheek throbbed; he'd have a bruise
before long. At least Scratha hadn't been wearing any rings.
“I saw you rooting through my pack,” Scratha said. He crossed his arms; his black glare tied knots in
Idisio's stomach. “You thought I was asleep.”
As the man spoke, Idisio poked a tongue around in his mouth, checking for loosened teeth; they all
seemed solid.
“I was checking to make sure nothing had been stolen,” he said. “I saw that girl coming out of the room
and thought she might have taken something.”
Scratha stared at him for a moment, then shook his head. “Either that's the worst lie I've ever heard, or
it's truth. And I know you lie better than that. Get up and tell me what happened.”
Idisio climbed to his feet, watching his master carefully; there were still lines between Scratha's eyebrows,
but the anger seemed to have passed. Idisio settled on the edge of a chair and said, “I was afraid
someone was thieving through our room while we were eating. So I went to check, and caught that
blonde girl as she rushed out of our room; she said she didn't steal anything, and you came in while we
were arguing it.”
Scratha's eyebrows rose into a deeply skeptical expression.
“I know how it looked,” Idisio said. “But I couldn't get her to admit she'd taken anything, so I let her go
and checked the packs to see if anything was missing. I thought you had your knives with you; I didn't
realize you'd left them in the pack.”
He went on to detail his later search for the noise that had woken him, and the hurried, interrupted flight.
He made sure to phrase his intent as a return to his master's side for advice, and although Scratha gave
him a dark, frowning look at that, he let the lie rest without question.
His master picked up the knife from the side table, stared at it a moment, then started to sit on the bed.
Idisio heard a faint hissing rattle, and opened his mouth to shout a warning; Scratha spun around and
stabbed the knife into the mattress, then leapt backwards, almost crashing into Idisio. Idisio hastily
scrambled out of the way, only to find Scratha's hand clamped on his shoulder.
“Hold still,” Scratha ordered. “Not a muscle. Not a sound.”
Idisio, heart thudding in his chest, did his best to still his trembling hands.
After what seemed an eternity of silence, Scratha let out a long breath, released Idisio's shoulder, and
moved towards the bed again. He stood staring down at the spot where his knife stuck out of the
mattress, let out another great sigh, and said, “You didn't ask if this girl left anythingbehind , by chance?”

Page 78

Idisio edged forward, staring wide-eyed at the scarlet and black stripe twitching limply across the bed.
“Marsh asp. You're lucky it didn't bite you.”
“It did,” Scratha said. For the first time, Idisio noticed his master held his left hand cradled in his right.
The words crashed into Idisio like a hurricane wave. “You . . . oh, gods, I'll go get the—”
“Stay here.”
Halfway to the door, Idisio turned in place, feeling rather wild-eyed. “What? You need the healer, I have
to go, that thing's deadly—”
“I don't need some village bumpkin of a healer,” Scratha said through his teeth. “Get that thing off the
bed.”
It took all Idisio's courage to approach the still-writhing snake, yank the knife free, and use the tip of the
blade to knock the thing onto the floor well away from them. As it fell, the head and body parted ways,
landing several inches apart; Idisio shuddered and shut his eyes. He prayed silently that Scratha wouldn't
ask him to take the snake out of the room. He didn't think he could stand that.
Scratha stumbled to the bed and sat down, pulling his legs into a desert-style fold. His face beaded with
sweat and began to lose color rapidly.
“I have to get you help,” Idisio almost whined in desperation.
“Sit back down,” Scratha said, “and shutup for a moment.”
Idisio sank into the one chair and pulled his own feet up, suddenly terrified that more snakes would creep
out from the floorboards and attack his bare feet. Realizing he still held the knife, he started to set it aside
on the table, but Scratha shook his head.
“Keep it to hand in case of more vermin,” he said. “If that snake was left here on purpose, there's likely
more than one slithering about.”
Idisio tucked his feet more tightly against himself and stared around the room, his heart hammering ever
louder in his ears. “Why would someone do that?” he gabbled.
“Don't know. Damn stupid way to try to kill someone.” Scratha breathed deeply and shut his eyes.
“Probably just coincidence. But stay here,” he mumbled. “Stay here.”
“I will, Master,” Idisio promised, his hands clenched tight around his knees. The man was about to die,
and then what? Idisio would be alone with a village certain of his guilt. He shivered and shut his own
eyes, not wanting to watch the final spasms as the poison worked through his master's system.
Scratha's breathing disintegrated into a series of hoarse pants. He moaned, coughed violently several
times, then, incredibly, spoke.
“Idisio. I'm not going to die. Stop looking so idiotic.”
His voice sounded blurred with pain but strong; Idisio opened his eyes and stared in unconcealed
astonishment. Scratha still sat upright, sweat thick on his face, his hands trembling, but his eyes fierce and

Page 79

clear as ever.
“It takes more than a swamp asp,” Scratha said, pausing for breath between each word, “to kill a desert
lord. Are there more snakes in the room?”
Idisio tore his fascinated stare from his master's face and scanned the room hastily. “I don't see any.”
“Good enough. Now think: that girl. . . .” Scratha stopped, breathed unevenly for a while with his eyes
shut, then went on. “Ground was trampled. Why?”
“Someone was afraid their footprints would be easy to match to a face,” Idisio said, sitting up straight.
“There were three sets. One likely hers, small and thin and light; another large and splay-toed, deep in the
mud from a heavy person, and a third long and thin, a skinny man, I'd say, not much heavier than the
girl.”
“The deep one,” Scratha said. “Not that many large folk here.”
“Still too many for easy pointing.”
Scratha nodded. His breath came more easily now, and some color had returned to his face.
“Washcloth,” he said, pointing to the stand. Idisio scrambled to hand him one of the worn cloths and
watched as Scratha wiped the sweat from his face with an unsteady hand.
“Master. . . .” Idisio said tentatively.
“I'll be fine, Idisio,” Scratha said. “Let's go talk to the village master.”

The village master turned out to be a short, stocky man with grey hair clipped short against his skull and
wide, blue eyes. His gaze moved to the developing bruise on Idisio's cheek, held Idisio's eyes for a long,
questioning moment, then scanned upward to the tall nobleman.
“Can I help you,s'e ?” he said without warmth.
“I believe my servant had nothing to do with the girl found dead in the swamp,” Scratha said bluntly. “We
will stay until the person responsible is found.” He seemed to have recovered almost completely during
the walk to the village master's house, but Idisio noticed that he leaned heavily on any supporting surface
available.
“You've not been accused of Kera's death,s'e .”
“I know that,” Scratha said, and shifted casually to lean against the doorframe, arms crossed. The long
sleeves of his shirt, while undoubtedly hot, served to hide his swollen arm. “But how many here believe us
both innocent?”
Silence. The man's blue eyes watched the tall nobleman warily.

Page 80

“You don't even believe it,” Scratha said.
“You've obviously got a temper,s'e ,” the village master said, face expressionless.
Scratha opened his mouth, face darkening, then slid a glance sideways to Idisio and sighed.
“True enough,” he said. “But it's a far cry from that to sticking a knife in a girl's stomach.”
“Nobody in this village would have killed Kera,” the master said. “There was no reason.”
“We had no reason, either,” Scratha retorted, his dark eyebrows scrunching again. “Would you be so
kind as to listen to our account before making up your mind?”
Thin lips pursed for a moment; then the man nodded once.
Scratha rapidly summarized his own and Idisio's movements since arriving in town.
“I'll swear to the truth of those words on my blood,” he finished. Idisio almost groaned aloud. That
phrase wasonly ever used by southern nobles.
The village master's expression changed instantly from skeptical to shocked. He backed up a step,
staring at the tall man.
“I beg your pardon, my lord,” he stammered. “I meant no offense . . . please . . . the blood oath isn't
necessary. You don't need to stay until this is all sorted out.”
Scratha closed his eyes briefly, his lips tightening.
“No offense taken,” he said at last, looking at the man again. He swayed a little, caught himself against
the doorframe. “And I will stay, because I want to clear my name and that of my servant.”
“Your name is without stain,” the man said hastily, looking ever more confused and afraid. “We would
not dare accuse—”
“Let's skip all that. I'ms'e Gerau Sa'adenit, nothing more or less.” He glared until the man gave a shaky,
wide-eyed nod of agreement. “One of the prints my servant saw was made by a heavy man, barefoot,
with wide-set toes. Who here matches that description?”
The old man lowered his gaze to the floor, frowning as he thought for a time, then said, “We have
perhaps ten large men in the village. Four of them might have been foolish enough to walk into the
marshes at night barefoot. Two of those are married, and one of them has been ill for the past three days
with fever.”
He paused. “But none of them ever had words with Kera, or even a hard glance at her that I heard of.
Asti Lashnar is very protective of his daughter's honor. He'd planned on finding her a good marriage in
Bright Bay his next trip.”
Scratha snorted and opened his mouth. Afraid of what might emerge, Idisio cut in first, ignoring his
master's sharp glare: “Men, you said. Are you counting boys?”
“Boys,” the village master said slowly, drawing the word out. “No, I can't think of any.”

Page 81

“How about the one tripped me up and roused the village?” Idisio said.
“Oh, Karic?” the old man said, eyebrows rising in apparent surprise. “Well, yes, but . . . well, yes. But he
was tending merchant Lashnar's mare all of last night, and he's gone to deliver news to the next village
on.”
“He was working with another boy, wasn't he?” Idisio said. “Baylor?”
“Yee-ess,” the man said, his frown deepening. “But—”
“Let's go talk to Baylor,” Scratha suggested.
Face wrinkled in clear reluctance, the village master finally nodded and said, as he shut the door behind
him, “He'll be at the stables.”
“What, Lashnar's trusting him with the mare again?”
“There's nobody else, with Karic out of town,” the village master said. His lips thinned as though he'd
regretted saying that much, and he stalked towards the stables without looking back.

“No,” Baylor said positively, this thin face hard and hostile as he looked at Scratha and Idisio. “He was
here, with me, all night. Lashnar tol' him to stay an' make sure everything was good, as he don't trustme
with his mare no more.” The boy's expression suggested a fair amount of money had been involved in the
lost job.
“Thank you, Baylor,” the village master said in a tone of poorly hidden relief, and started to turn away.
Scratha didn't move from his spot on a hay bale. Neither did Idisio.
“All night?” Idisio asked. “Not even left to go empty his bladder?”
“All night,” the stable boy repeated, glaring at Idisio.
“How about you?” Idisio said. “Did you wander out for a bit?”
“No!” the boy said, indignant now. “What are you, deaf? I said we was both here all night!”
“I smelled wine on Karic's breath, when he knocked me down,” Idisio said. “How can you drink and not
have to piss?”
“We don't drink around the horses,” Baylor said, but his eyes flickered to the village master as he spoke.
A child could have caught the lie.
“Then where did he go to drink?”
“He didn't! I didn't! Look, I've work to do. I can't stand here—”

Page 82

“You're not done yet,” Scratha said as the boy started to turn away.
“Let him be!” the village master said. “He's answered your questions.”
“He lied,” Idisio said with absolute certainty. ”Kera's the one ran to her father and lost him the position of
caring for Lashnar's mare. A few drinks and he'd be angry enough to take it out on her.”
Baylor's ears were turning pink. “I'd never hurt Kera!”
“Your prints led into the swamp,” Idisio said. He pointed to the ground near the boy's feet. “And your
feet are still muddy. What were you doing out there?”
“I wasn't—” Baylor scuffed his feet, a panicky look on his face; he stopped abruptly and stared at them,
eyes rimmed with sudden dampness.
“Do you think Karic will back you, if you're accused of murder?” Idisio said before anyone else could
speak. “Do you think he'll step forward to save you?”
“That'senough ,” the village master said, but Baylor crumbled.
“I didn't hurt Kera,” he said, tears spilling down his cheeks now. “I didn't. I swear it. I don't know who
did. She ran into the swamp after dinner, crying, and I followed her to see what was wrong. She wouldn't
tell me, and I was supposed to meet Karic at the stables, so I had to go back.”
Idisio shook his head and wished he dared interrupt to call the boy a liar; but Scratha's mood still hung
too chancy, and collecting another bruise for insolence seemed too likely.
Unheeding, Baylor went on, “Karic was at the stables, and he was in a bad mood, and after a while he
said he had to take care of something, and he left. And next thing I heard from him, he was shouting to
rouse the village about a thief.” The stable boy looked at them with wide, imploring eyes, and sniffled,
wiping his sleeve across his nose.
“How did you know where to find her?” Idisio asked. He'd seen the best cons in Bright Bay collapse in
wholly fake tears before; Baylor wasn't impressing him.
The tips of Baylor's ears reddened again. “There's a place she goes sometimes.” He looked away and
swallowed hard. “Went, I mean. I like wandering around in the swamp, it don't scare me. She asked, a
while back, if I knew a place where you could be alone. I had a place I went, sometimes, not far out, but
real private, and when she asked I showed it to her. I thought, well, maybe. . . .”
“You thought she wanted you to be alone with her,” Scratha said.
The boy nodded miserably and wiped at his nose again. “But she didn't. She saidthank you and never
mentioned it again, but I saw her go into the swamp sometimes at night, and. . . .” He faltered again, and
looked at the ground.
“And you followed her,” Idisio said,wondering if he might be wrong after all. Desert lords were supposed
to be able tosmell a lie, but Scratha seemed to be accepting the story. Perhaps living on the streets had
made Idisio too cynical. “You wanted to know what she was doing.”
The boy shrugged, not meeting their eyes. He kept his gaze on the ground and shuffled uncomfortably in

Page 83

place.
The village master had looked steadily more horrified as the tale went on.
“Baylor,” he said, voice hardly more than a whisper, “was she . . . meeting someone out there?”
Baylor swallowed hard and nodded.
“Was it. . . .” The village master faltered, then fell silent.
“Who was it?” Scratha said, much more sharply.
The stable boy looked utterly miserable as he wiped at his nose again, glancing around as if searching for
an escape.
“Karic,” he said at last.
The village master let out a faint moan. “Itoldhim. . . .” he said. “Damnthe boy. Lashnar's going to kill
him.”
“He's a right, if Karic killed the girl,” Scratha said without sympathy, and turned away from the trembling
boy before him. “He won't be back.”
The old man bristled but, under Scratha's dark stare, said nothing.
Idisio almost hissed in frustration. Heknew Baylor was still lying, but Scratha and the village master
seemed to be accepting the story without reservation.
“Why would Karic kill her?” the village master said, rallying. “If they were lovers, why would he kill her?
I'd sooner believe her father killed her for dallying outside his plans.”
Scratha shot the village master a curious look, a mixture of puzzlement and contempt. “He'd kill his own
daughter for taking a lover?”
The village master blinked, flustered. “Well, wait, no, that's not what I—”
“Did she have any friends that she might have talked to?” Idisio interrupted, afraid of where this would
lead. Scratha frowned at him but let it pass without further reaction.
“Her father didn't let her have any friends,” the village master said with poorly concealed relief at the
change in subject. “But she worked at the inn; maybe the innkeeper knows something of who she talked
to.”

“She was friends with one of my serving-girls, Seshya,” said the innkeeper. He shook his head, his chins
quivering. “I don't know what I'm going to do without Kera. She was the quickest hand at changing the
linens and cleaning a room, and the only honest one I could find to mind the till.”

Page 84

“Don't let Lashnar know she talked to that woman,” the village master said dryly.
“You think I'm a fool?” the innkeeper said. “She wasn't allowed to talk to any girls, stand up to any of the
dances, join any sewing circles, smile at any boys. Villagers weren't good enough for her father; he
wanted a marriage to some noble lord of Bright Bay. He didn't want anything to sully her reputation.
Seshya was the only one that would risk Lashnar's anger and spend time talking to the poor girl.”
“A whore with a heart of gold,” the village master said with a sigh. “That's an old story.”
“And usually a false one,” Scratha said tartly. “Let's go talk to this woman.”

The serving-girl's expression was as sulky as it had been the night before, intensified by a certain
disordered appearance from having just woken up. Her clothing had been loosely fastened and not too
thoroughly at that; as she swayed sleepily against the doorframe to her small room, flashes of round, soft
skin showed through.
“Whaddya want?” she said. “Pardon, Master, but I'm only just asleep.”
“Busy night?” Scratha said. She narrowed her eyes at him over the village master's shoulder and sneered.
“We're here about Kera,” the village master said sharply, bringing her attention back to him.
“What about her?” the girl said, mouth still twisted unpleasantly. “She isn't here.”
“She's dead,” Scratha said. “Murdered.”
The haughty look faded into pale shock. “I had nothing to do with it.”
“You've been talking to Kera behind Lashnar's back,” the village master said, ignoring her protest. “What
did she tell you about Karic?”
The girl hesitated, then shook her head. “Nothing.”
“Seshya,” the village master said, voice flat.
“All right,” the tavern girl said. “He was after her. He wanted her, and she couldn't figure how to tell him
to get lost.”
“Try again,” Scratha said, voice hard. “Truth this time.”
Idisio stared at Scratha in astonishment; the girlhad been telling the truth. How could he not hear the
honesty in Seshya's voice? The man certainly wasn't showing any signs of the famed desert lord nose for
veracity.
“Thatistruth,” the barmaid flared, straightening. “You think she was a whore, just because she talked to
me? She didn't like him. He kept following her, trapping her in odd places when her father wasn't around,
trying to get a kiss and a feel. She came by here crying about it more than once, asking how to fend him
off without having her father involved.”

Page 85

“Why wouldn't she go to her father?” Scratha asked.
She made a scornful, impatient noise, and leaned against the doorframe again. “Karic would just say she
threw herself at him and he turned her away.”
“Lashnar would believe Karic over his own daughter?”
“You've met the man; what do you think?” She shook her head. “Karic knows how to play Lashnar.
Kera's awoman . Under Lashnar's damn Church beliefs—oh, don't wince, master, you've cursed the
s'iopes yourself—Kera wouldn't have had a chance.”
The village master avoided their eyes. “Too many cups,” he muttered defensively. “Nothing more.”
Scratha shook his head, seeming mildly amused for a moment, and said, “The merchant is grieving
honestly enough.”
“For the loss of his chances to marry into status and save his precious business,” Seshya sneered. “That's
all.”
“So she wasn't a whore,” Idisio said. “Was she a thief?”
“No,” Seshya said, looking surprised. “Never that. She'd badger me about returning an accurate count of
a drunk customer's change.” She blushed and avoided their eyes.
“Is Karic a thief?” Idisio asked, frowning.
Seshya shrugged. “He's too clumsy to pick pockets, but he's more than happy to pick up something left
unattended. Why are you asking about Karic?”
“He was supposed to be watching Lashnar's mare last night,” the village master said. “He slipped away in
a bad mood after midnight, and Kera was killed sometime after that.”
Seshya didn't hesitate. “He was here. He needed someone to . . . talk to.” She shrugged at their
combined looks of disbelief. “Baylor's better with animals than Karic is, but Karic's better at keeping to
Lashnar's good side, so they team up to get jobs out of the man. Then Baylor does the work and Karic
does as he pleases. Sometimes he comes to talk to me, when I don't have anything better to do.” She
smirked.
If she was lying, she was better at it than Baylor. Not at all unlikely, but still. . . .
“If he's better with animals, how could he let the stables get in such a state?” Scratha demanded,
scowling.
Seshya shrugged. “I don't know. I've never been particularlycloseto Baylor.” She smirked again.
“When did Karic leave you?” Idisio cut in before Scratha or the village master could deliver the retorts
visibly forming in their mouths.
“Just before dawn.”

Page 86

“So he couldn't have—Damn.” Idisio spun on his heel and ran for the stables.

Idisio sank onto a partially breached bale of hay and stared at the empty stall, cursing quietly under his
breath, until Scratha, the village master, and Seshya hurried into the stables a few moments later.
“Gone,” Idisio said, pointing to where his horse had been. “Long gone. Probably ran as soon as we
rounded the corner.”
“Karic took her out to the swamp,” Scratha said, staring at the empty stall, “willing or unwilling,
depending who you believe; fought with her, because I don't believe Baylor could have delivered that
punch. Left her unconscious on the ground, and then Baylor came looking and was so upset over what
he saw as her choosing Karic that he killed her—with one ofmy daggers? No. None of that makes sense.
We're missing something.” He glowered, brooding and shaking his head.
A labored grunting caught everyone's attention, and Scratha moved to look into another stall.
“Lashnar's mare is foaling,” he said. “Looks like she's in trouble. Do you have anyone else skilled with
horses in the village?”
“Some,” the village master said, “but not a one would touch this mare. Lashnar's got an evil temper when
things go wrong, and he's already strung tight. I won't even ask. Karic and Baylor were the only ones that
man trusted with his precious horses.”
Scratha stared at the village master with an expression that made the man back up a step. “You'd let this
mare die for the sake of a man's temper?”
“Lashnar's misfortunes are sent by the gods,” the village master said. “Who are we to argue that or
prevent his just punishment?”
Seshya snorted and rolled her eyes; the village master shot her a stern glare and added, “I may not like
the s'iopes, but there's truth in the holy word they preach.”
“It's not a punishment,” Scratha said sharply, “it's a mare struggling with labor. Lashnar's misfortunes are
his own; do you really think the gods would inflict trouble on a dumb beast to punish a man?”
The village master shook his head without answering and walked out of the stables, face set.
Scratha made a hissing noise, as if restraining himself from a vile curse. “Get out. Not you,” he added as
Idisio started to stand. “You stay here. I'll need help.”
Seshya left without protest. Scratha blew out a hard breath as he studied the struggling mare.
“If we ride now,” he said, “we could catch the boy, I think.” He sighed, cursed again almost absently,
and went into the stall. “We'll catch up with him on the road, sooner or later,” he added over his
shoulder.
“At least the mare will foal in a clean stall,” Idisio said.

Page 87

His master shot him a sour look and said nothing.

“I still don't understandwhy ,” Idisio said, hours later. “What could have made Baylor kill her—if he did,
and not Karic? Why did he steal those knives? Did he plant that snake in our room? Did she? Why?
How was Karic involved? Is he coming back?” He threw his arms wide in a gesture of frustration. “I
could go on forever!”
Scratha, face almost grey and lined with exhaustion, dipped a cloth in the trough and slowly scrubbed
the blood and mucus from his hands.
“Some things never get solved,” he said finally. “We're clear of the charge, and that's all I care about. If
we come across the boys on the road, I'll have some hard questions for them to answer, but we've no
real authority unless we can get them in front of a village judge.” He dropped the cloth on the ground and
stretched, putting his hands into the small of his back and arching backwards with a grunt before
straightening again. “At least we saved the foal and mare.”
“It doesn't seem fair,” Idisio said. “Not knowing why, I mean.”
His master's mouth twitched into a faint smile. “Fair? From a streetthief who tricked his way into my
service after trying to steal my purse?”
Idisio shrugged, too tired to be embarrassed by the barb. “That was survival. I hate not knowing the
answers when I have questions.”
Scratha's smile faded. He looked to the south, brooding, and said under his breath, “So do I.”

Chapter Eight
The following night, Deiq again called Alyea to sit by him but offered little conversation until their plates
were being cleared away. Then he said, lazily, “You'll be in Water's End tomorrow, Lady Alyea.”
She nodded, wary at his ostentatiously casual manner.
“Where will you go from there, I wonder?” he murmured, gaze fixed on her face, a faint smile on his own
lips.
Hopefully away from you, she thought but didn't say; he seemed to read the words in her carefully
expressionless gaze and laughed.
“I'm hurt, my lady,” he said. “I get the feeling you'll be relieved to be out of my presence.”

Page 88

She dropped her gaze to the table, unable to think of a reply that might turn that too-bright, intent gaze
away.
“Come,” Deiq said abruptly, standing. “Walk with me.”
She rose at the urging of his hand on her wrist; while he didn't grip tightly enough to hurt, the contact felt
as unbreakable as a steel cuff.
“S'e,” she said, “I'm afraid I need to retire for the evening.” She cast a rapid glance towards the side
table where Chac sat. He rose and moved towards them.
Deiq turned his gaze to the old man and smiled. His grip didn't loosen. “Your advisor is welcome to trail
along behind us. I want to show you something, and mean you no harm.”
“Let go of my wrist, then,s'e ,” Alyea said in a quiet, level tone.
Deiq looked at his hand on her arm as if surprised, and let go.
“Forgive me, my lady,” he said as Chac reached them. “I forget the strength of my grip at times.”
Alyea stepped back a pace.
“My apologies for alarming you, Chacerly,” Deiq said to the old man before Chac could speak. “I only
wished to take the lady for a walk to see the moon rise over the Kingsea. It's a spectacular sight in the
Horn. Would you come with us? I think the lady has heard some of the unfounded, evil tales about me.
Your presence would ease her fears.”
His gaze, bright and predatory, stayed on the old man's face as if studying each line for a weakness.
Chac looked at Alyea, questioning; she nodded, seeing no politic alternative to going for the walk.
“I think it more proper,” the old man said at last, “for Lady Alyea's maid to attend her. I will send the
woman to you, my lady.S'e.” He gave a short, stiff bow and turned away.
“Ah, he's so devoted to proper courtesies,” Deiq said, and laid gentle fingertips against Alyea's shoulder.
“Let's move outside to wait for your servant, shall we?”
He used a light touch rather than an iron grip, but it carried the same sense of undeniable force. She
allowed him to urge her from the room and took a seat on a wide bench just outside the dining hall. The
tall man gracefully stepped aside, standing more than an arm's length away. In the flickering torchlight, his
smile seemed a mocking thing of shadow and smoke, and he stayed silent until Halla appeared. The
woman looked severely flustered, her face pale and her greeting too bright.
“S'aHalla,” Deiq said, sounding grave and concerned. His smile disappeared. “You seem distraught. Is
something the matter?”
“Not at all,” Halla said too quickly.
Deiq moved closer to the nervous woman, until she had to tilt her head to stare up at him. “Was the meal
unsatisfactory?”
“No,” Halla said, “no, it was very good.” She backed away a step, dropping her gaze.

Page 89

“You're not pleased to see me?” Deiq said, not moving. “You were quite friendly the last couple of days,
s'a . Is something different?”
Oh, gods, Alyea thought,please tell me she hasn't gone to bed with him, please, oh gods, what a disaster
that would be. . . .
“I've offered you proper courtesy,” Halla said, her back stiffening and her jaw firming. “Don't you make it
sound as if I've done more!”
Deiq stared at her for a moment, then laughed, the tension along his shoulders relaxing.
“My apologies. I didn't mean to make any such implication. I seem to be growing careless tonight. The
wine must have been more potent than I expected.”
That would have held more weight, Alyea reflected sourly, if she'd seen him call for anything but water at
dinner. But Halla, ignorant of the lie, seemed warily relieved.
Deiq turned and held out a hand to Alyea. “My lady. Shall we walk?”
She rose without accepting the offered help, motioning Halla to walk behind her, and followed as Deiq
strode across the cleared courtyard. He started along a narrow path at the far end.
“Where are we going,s'e Deiq?” Alyea asked.
“There is an excellent and very quiet spot not far from here,” he said over his shoulder, “with a lovely
view.”
Alyea glanced back over her shoulder, reassuring herself that Halla followed close; she didn't like the
sound of this at all. Deiq had made it plain, in his advance on Halla, that he could easily master the plump
woman if he chose, whatever her bravery at the last moment.
“Don't worry so much,” Deiq said, stopping and turning to look Alyea squarely in the face. “Your
maidservant is not the only one watching us at the moment. Your safety and honor is beyond any
question, my lady.” He grinned and started off again.
Alyea took a deep breath and followed, her heart hammering.
“My lady,” Halla whispered from behind, “do you think we ought to go back?”
“But why should we?” Deiq said without turning his head. “A simple walk to see a beautiful sight; where's
the harm?”
He stopped and faced them again, his dark eyes glittering as he stared at the northern woman. “From the
way you're acting,s'a , one might think you'd heard some of the false and wicked stories about me that
have also frightened Lady Alyea. One might wonder about the words Lady Alyea's advisor has been
putting against my name.”
Alyea motioned Halla to silence and moved to block the northern woman from that intense stare. Deiq's
gaze shifted to her face, and a smile spread across his features.

Page 90

“You protect your servants,” he said. “That's a generous way, and one little seen in Bright Bay of late.”
She returned glare for stare, and he finally shrugged and turned around again. His pace increased; the
two women scrambled to keep up.
The narrow path opened abruptly to a wide bare space. The ground softened underfoot: not quite sand,
nor the clay of the lower Horn. A line of trees and scrub lay behind them, their branches looming,
feathery shapes in the darkness. Overhead, thousands of stars lit the infinity of sky. Ahead of them,
perhaps sixty paces, the ground dropped abruptly into a series of harsh chasms and gullies that seemed
to descend forever, a rocky slope that rolled down and down and down. The rising moon, even at just
past half full, dropped stark shadows to bring that rocky turmoil into sharp relief. Far below and farther
east, water glinted, a shifting of light patterns at the edge of a larger, steadier net of lights: a port city.
Alyea stood silent, staring out at the vast sight.
“That's the Kingsea,” Deiq said in her ear. He'd moved to stand beside her. “And the port of Stass.”
“Incredible,” Alyea said with complete honesty. “I've never seen anything like this.”
“Few are brave enough to leave the King's Road to see sights like this,” Deiq said.
She glanced sideways at that, suspecting malice; but his face, in the moonlight, held amusement. He was
teasing her.
“Did you know,” he said, his gaze returning to the view, “that the wordkingactually comes from a very
old southern dialect, from before the Split?”
“Yes. I know.Kaen , meaning leader.”
“Ah, your tutors gave you heretic knowledge?” He grinned at her.
“No, my nurse—” She stopped short. “Never mind.”
He studied her with sharp understanding. “And one day your nurse, who told you heretic stories, went
away and never came back,” he said softly. “I'm sorry.”
She shut her eyes against sudden tears and bit her tongue to keep from answering.
After a moment, Deiq let out a small sigh. “I know a number of spots like this along the road I'll be taking
tomorrow,” he said, his tone resuming its dry detachment. “There's a side trail that leads from here to
Port Stass; not a safe road for horses and guards and advisors. Chacerly has never taken it. He knows
better than to try. He won't follow you down that trail, if you come with me.”
Reasonably steady now, she opened her eyes and studied his dimly lit profile. His gaze rested on the port
city far below, and his expression seemed merely thoughtful.
“I'll offer my company again,” he went on. “Please, come travel with me. I'll get you to Scratha safely.
Your advisors aren't men to trust.”
His voice flowed over her, smooth and warm and undeniably appealing. She wondered if Chac could
simply be jealous of a younger, more attractive man. Perhaps she could travel with Deiq and meet Chac
at Scratha Fortress . . . it might be a good idea to make the trip shorter . . . she shook her head sharply.

Page 91

“No, thank you,” she said, more harshly than she'd intended.
He didn't seem offended.
“Consider it overnight, Lady Alyea,” he said, and Alyea shut her eyes again. His voicedragged at her,
insidiously compelling. She had a disturbing feeling that if he pressed her right now, she'd agree.
“I don't need to,” she snapped, taking refuge in anger. “I'm staying with the advisors the king's given me.”
“Rather than a man you've only just met,” he said with a faint sigh. “I understand. But most of your fear
comes from Chacerly.” He looked at her, his gaze shadowed. “He gives me far worse of a name than I
deserve, I'm afraid. And isn't giving you a good enough one.”
She avoided his stare and watched the moonlight reflecting in slow, dancing patterns from the waves far
below.
“The men you ride with,” he said, dropping his voice to a near-whisper, “aren't the ones to trust. They
serve you in name, but they watch you with the care of men with two masters. I'll help you, if you ask.”
“At what price?” Alyea said, forcing herself to sound cold.
Deiq smiled. “I don't play the gamess'eChacerly does,” he said. “I'll help you because I want to. Because
you're far too good to waste yourself on the games of a man who needed help to take the throne from a
mad, weak ruler in an unstable kingdom.”
“I doubt you do anything for free, or without advantage to yourself,” Alyea said sharply.
His voice swayed in a soothing cadence that raised her heartbeat and scrambled her thoughts. “The
advantage I seek is your respect. Nothing more complicated than that.”
She stared at him, unsure how to answer that.
He straightened, his voice becoming more distant and formal, but a faint smile slanted the corners of his
mouth into a sardonic expression. “Are you ready to be escorted back to the way-stop?”
“Yes,” she said, forcing speech through a suddenly dry throat.
Halla's face, as they turned to leave, almost matched the white of the moon.

Chac's good humor returned after Deiq left their party, and he rode beside her, pointing out native plants
and animals and relating endless stories about them. The legends and folklore should have been
fascinating, but Alyea couldn't keep her attention on the old man's words.
Halla rode as far back as she could, away from Alyea, and her expression had been troubled and distant
all morning. With a faint gesture of apology to Chac, Alyea took the opportunity of a narrow spot in the
trail to drop back in line, fetching up beside her maidservant.

Page 92

Halla shot her a frightened, almost resentful glance.
“My lady,” she said, and put her gaze firmly forward.
“Halla,” Alyea said, “what's the matter?”
The northern woman's shoulders shifted in a faint shrug. “I didn't know what I was getting into, hiring on
with you. I don't like being threatened. I confess myself glad to be nearing Water's End and the finish of
my hire.”
“Threatened?”
“Chacerly made it clear that Deiq wasn't to touch you. He said he was holding me personally responsible,
and the way he said it I've heard before. It was a threat, nothing less. And you can't tell me that Deiq's
muscling into my face wasn't intimidation. I don't like it. I may not have as much status as you, but I've my
own dignity to think of.”
Alyea rode for a bit in silence, thinking over what the woman had said, before responding.
“What do you think of Deiq now?” she asked finally.
“I don't like him, and it's clear your advisor doesn't like him,” Halla said, “but he's a powerful man in his
own right, and that voice! He could melt butter with it. Left my knees weak. I don't know how you stood
against it.”
Alyea snorted. “Not easily.”
“Unmarried women are nothing but trouble and strife around single men,” Halla said unexpectedly. “You
ought to have a husband or guardian on this journey with you, to keep the unwed men at a proper
distance.”
The irony failed to amuse Alyea: Chac had demanded she have lady servants, while Halla wanted a man
for protection.
“Halla,” she said patiently, “no man is going to take me without my consent.” She left out the wordagain .
“I've trained with fist and knife for that very reason.”
“You'd strike a man?” Halla's eyes went round and shocked.
“If he tried to rape me, I'd kill him,” Alyea said. “Halla, I grew up in Bright Bay under Ninnic. I learned to
protect myself.”
The words sounded like posturing to her ears, and she wished she hadn't spoken so confidently. But
Halla didn't know about Pieas, or about Ethu.Gods, don't think about that right now! A familiar tight
prickling filled her throat.
“King Ninnic was a godly man,” Halla said stiffly.
Alyea's temper flared sharply. “Ninnic was a raving lunatic with a taste for torturing anything he could get
his hands on,” she snapped. “Your home isn't that far from the main route; you must have heard about it.”

Page 93

“Those stories are lies,” Halla said with the arrogance of misplaced certainty. “Deceit spread by the
southerners to destroy our faith.”
Alyea made an impatient gesture. “I lived through it. Halla, I've seen men gutted and left to die in pools of
their own blood because yourgodly Ninnic wanted to see how long a man could last with his intestines all
over the floor. I've seen men and women who did nothing worse than protest such treatment of their
families skinned alive on the same principle.”
Halla's face scrunched. She made a vague fluttering motion with one hand, as if wanting Alyea to be
quiet. The other hand clutched the reins tightly, knuckles white.
Alyea didn't stop. “Three of my maidservants were seized for Ninnic's amusement. He would choose and
discard women like toys, throwing them to his guards after he tired of them. Most of the time they didn't
survive past the guards' handling, but if they did they were kept as court prostitutes for the lower nobles.
I've seen your precious s'iopes flay men to death for trying to protect their women from that. These
women were taken regardless of whether they were married or widowed or even past puberty. One of
my maids was twelve.”
“That'senough! ”
“It's not nearly enough,” Alyea snapped. “That's barely the beginning of what I've seen. Don't you ever
lecture me or anyone who lived through that on Church morality!”
She fell silent, breathing hard. She'd done her best to forget the past; the rant had been a mistake. She'd
have screaming nightmares tonight.
Halla said nothing. She had a hand over her heart and a glazed look on her pale face.
“One of the first things King Oruen did when he took the throne,” Alyea said more quietly, “was to order
that entire hall razed to the ground and rebuilt on the other side of the palace. He said too much evil had
gone into that hall for him to ever sit in it again. The ground was salted, burned, and surrounded by a
fence that's always locked. It's going to stay that way forever. He doesn't want anyone to forget.”
Halla's eyes glittered with held tears, and her gaze stayed determinedly ahead of them.
“The priests wouldn't do that,” she said, in an attempt at her former stiffness; then, unwillingly: “Did you
really see that?”
“I really did,” Alyea said, and tried to gentle her tone. “I don't know what the priests north of the Great
Forest have been doing, Halla, but down here the Church isn't a good name to carry on your banner.
You walk around with a fistful of northern prejudices showing and you're likely, at best, to get killed.”
“At best?” Halla said, her face and shoulders stiffening again.
Alyea felt a surge of pity for her; but reality was what reality was. It would do the woman no favors to let
her go with her illusions intact.
“There are worse things,” Alyea said, “than a quick death.”

Page 94

Chapter Nine
Mindful of Idisio's still-healing feet but wanting to spare their remaining horse as much strain as possible,
Scratha insisted on their periodically switching off between walking and riding. Idisio made no complaint,
although after a while the effort of heaving his tired body back up into the saddle almost seemed not
worth the trouble. When the horse began to visibly droop and plod, Idisio and Scratha both started
walking—and Idisio realized he’d been wrong. It had definitely been worth the trouble.
Fortunately, they reached the next village less than two miles later, although the sun hung low behind
them and their shadows stretched long in front by the time they arrived.
Obein obviously had more pride than the marsh town of Kybeach displayed; the rough stones of the
village streets were free of drifting sand, and the entry road had been recently swept with a rake-like
brush. They'd seen two more News-Riders headed east and three more carts taking northern goods
west, the last less than an hour ago, but the only tracks visible were their own.
“There's such a thing as too clean,” Scratha said sourly. His temper had been markedly poor since the
snake bite.
Idisio grinned. “I'll bet the stables are better here.”
Scratha glowered at him.
“And if the stables are clean,” Idisio went on, “the boy in charge will have more wit than Baylor seemed
to. And that'll mean he has an eye for details, won't it? So he'd have noticed something odd, like a boy
from a poor village riding by on a rich man's horse.”
“You don't need wit to spot that,” Scratha said.
“But you do need quick wits to do something about it,” Idisio said, and watched his master's face lighten
in comprehension.
“You may be—”
“Useful. Yes, I know,” Idisio sighed.
Scratha checked, turning a startled stare on him. “Have I said that so often?”
Idisio glanced at Scratha's narrow face, assessing, and risked an honest answer. “Yes. You have.”
Scratha grunted, pursing his lips thoughtfully, and said nothing as they entered the stable yard. A girl,
muddy, disheveled, and sweaty, emerged in response to their repeated calls, curry brush held in one hand
and a fierce frown on her face. She glared around as if looking for someone, muttered a curse under her
breath, and finally turned a less unpleasant expression towards them.

Page 95

“Good evening,s'es ,” she said. She considered Scratha's horse for a moment, her expression thoughtful;
for some reason, Idisio didn't think she was judging quality.
Idisio glanced down the long row of stalls. The purple of a NewsRider horse tabard had been draped
over the door to one stall; the red and yellow flag of a high-ranking bard hung at the edge of another.
Most of the stalls had a flag of some sort by the door, marking them as occupied, but two were still
empty, by the look of it.
The girl followed Idisio's gaze and wiped sweat-darkened hair from her forehead. “There's a lad should
be around here to help you, but I don't see him. If you could wait a moment? I'll just finish up with this
mare and be right out to settle your horse.”
She glanced around again, as if thinking about shouting for the absent stable hand, then shook her head
and returned her attention to the two travelers before her.
“I can take care of my horse,” Scratha said, offering her a charming smile, “if you'll point me to a stall.
No need to worry after your lad.”
She nodded, appearing relieved. “Silver half-round for the night,s'e,” she said. “Either of those open stalls
at the end will do.”
Scratha's eyebrows rose, and Idisio sputtered indignation.
“The other stalls are less,” the girl said with a shrug. “Box stalls are more expensive, and all we have left.
You get a bag of good Arason horsefeed for the price, so it's not all that bad a deal,s'es . Take it or tie
your horse to the hitch by the tavern.” She went back into the stall from which she'd emerged without a
backward look.
Scratha smiled. “We'll pay it,” he said quietly as Idisio opened his mouth to protest. “Let be. Why don't
you spend some time talking to her while I get this beast settled in?” He patted the horse's neck fondly.
“Find out what she saw yesterday.”
Idisio blew out a resigned breath as his master led the horse away.
The girl had left the top half of the stall door open. He moved over to it and looked inside. She was
brushing down a trim, red-brown mare, singing softly. The mare's long, dark-rimmed ears flickered this
way and that, and she snorted and jerked when Idisio appeared.
“Easy,” the girl said, and glanced over her shoulder. “She's skittish. Stand still and don't speak loud.
What do you want?” Her voice remained pleasantly soothing, as if talking to the horse.
Idisio tried to keep his voice quiet, which was the best way to convey a lie anyway. “My master thinks
I've a ham hand with a horse. He told me to stay out of his way. I figured, watching you I could pick
something up, maybe.”
Her gaze turned considering and sharp. He had a feeling she didn't believe him, but she said only, “Huh,”
and went back to brushing.
Idisio watched her in silence for a while. Even muddy and with straggles of hair sticking to her face, she
still had a fine, narrow face and curves in places that he tried not to stare at. He aimed his gaze at her
hands, focusing on her movements; but as the girl leaned and stretched, other parts of her kept intruding
into his peripheral vision and distracting his best intentions. He was glad of the waist-height stall door
between them.

Page 96

When she straightened to cast an assessing glance over her work, he cleared his throat and said, “You
do this all day?”
“I'm the best at it,” she said. She patted the mare's neck and turned to ease out of the stall.
Idisio stepped aside hastily and glanced down the row again. Looking at her, close up, was even worse
than staring from several feet away.
“You know,” she said, staring at him, “there's a great bruise to the side of your face. Run into a door?”
Idisio's grin faded.
“Something like that,” he muttered.
“Huh,” she said after another hard stare at him, and turned away. After securely bolting the bottom half of
the stall door, she moved to the next stall, which had a small black flag beside it. Both halves of this door
were closed. “You'd probably like to see this fellow.” She unbolted the top half of the door and swung it
open.
A familiar, fine-boned nose poked out inquiringly.
The girl watched him narrowly. “This one yours, too?”
“Yes,” Idisio said, rubbing the silky nose. “How did . . .?”
“Well, if you want him back, you owe me for two horses,” she said.
Idisio stared at her. “Two?”
“I gave Baylor and Karic each a horse in return for this one,” she said. “They were lucky to get that
much; I won both those horses two days ago from some stupid northern who thought he could beat me
at five-card.”
Idisio's jaw sagged. “Both of them? When did they leave?”
“Early this morning,” she said. “And yes, both of them. Baylor came riding into town yesterday, face
white as Horn salt, and went to find Karic. The two of them came to find me a while after that, asking for
horses; the only thing they had to trade was this one. I thought it a fair deal.”
“Baylor stole this horse from us,” Idisio said. Something bothered him about the girl's story, but flustered
as he was by her nearness, he couldn't focus enough to tell what was wrong. She smelled of sweat and
horse and an odd, subtle spice. He wished the stall door still stood between them. He prayed she didn't
look down.
The girl shrugged. “That's not my problem. You want him back, you pay me his worth.”
Idisio looked down the row and saw Scratha stepping out of the box stall. “How much do you want?”
“Five gold rounds,” the girl said. “Less than this one's worth, I'd say, but that's what the northern valued
his two horses at, so I'll settle for that.”

Page 97

Idisio began to protest; Scratha's hand on his shoulder stopped him. His master considered girl and
horse.
“Five?” he said at last.
“You have good hearing,s'e ,” the girl said.
Scratha nodded. “Desert blood,” he said absently, and held out half a silver coin. “Here's for the other.
I'll think on it and let you know. Come, Idisio, let's get some rooms and dinner.”
Ignoring the surprise and displeasure on the girl's face, Idisio hurried after his master.
“They both ran,” he said. “Why both?”
“There's more going on here than a girl being murdered,” Scratha said, frowning. “Talk to her again after
dinner. And don't believe everything she says. She gave you that information without any prompting; I
never trust people who do that.”
“She seemed honest. I can read people pretty well.”
Scratha shot him an amused glance. “I think your judgment may get a bit skewed when it comes to
attractive young ladies.”
“Was she? I didn't even notice how she looked.”
Scratha arched an eyebrow and observed, “You're better at lying when your heart's in it.”

The inn, like the rest of the town, proved considerably cleaner than Kybeach's dingy offering. Wide,
low-silled windows with shutters flung wide let the last rays of sunlight into western-facing rooms and
brought the first glimmer of dawn into the eastern ones. Low beds of colorful southern flowers and herbs
edged every side of the building, and the occasional gust of wind kicked up a cloud of aroma that
reminded Idisio of his walk through the King's Gate gardens.
This wouldn't be a cheap inn. The owner, or perhaps the whole village, obviously knew it had a good
position here, just where travelers out of Bright Bay wanted to rest a bit, and travelers from the north
wanted to tidy up before arriving at the king's city. If Kybeach ever cleaned itself up, it could suck
business away from this town, being closer; but nothing could ever take care of that marshland stench at
low tide.
The sign brought an odd expression to Scratha's face. Idisio struggled to decipher the lettering on the
sign while his master stood staring at the door, and finally worked out that it read “Cida's Haven.”
Scratha shrugged in response to Idisio's puzzled stare and led the way inside.
A plump woman at the desk greeted them cheerfully, wide, dark eyes surveying them critically while her
mouth grinned.

Page 98

“Good eve to you, travelers,” she said. “Two rooms?”
“One,” Scratha said.
“We've one east and one west left,” she said. “Busy road lately, it's been, since the change in kings.
They're both the same price, five silver for the night and another silver for room service.” She winked.
Idisio felt his face crimson.
“Just the room,” Scratha said. “East, please.”
She gave them another appraising glance, her eyes lingering on Idisio's bruised face, and nodded.
“Sunrise room it is. Five silver bits, please . . . thank you.” She slid a key across the counter. “Down the
right hallway, fourth door on the right. You'll need to be out by noon.”
Scratha started to turn away, then swung back abruptly. “Are you called Cida?”
The woman's expression became opaque, like a window on a misty day. “That's the name of the inn.”
“But is it yours?” Scratha asked.
“The inn was here before I was born,s'e ,” she said. “Myname is Alre.”
Scratha smiled and turned away again, seeming satisfied.
“Good eve,s'a,” he said over his shoulder as they left the main room.
“What was that about?” Idisio asked when they were out of the woman's hearing range.
“Nothing important,” Scratha said, still smiling.
“You lie better when your heart's in it.”
“So does everyone.”

The tavern attached to the inn boasted well-dressed, quiet, and refined patrons who had no objection to
paying outrageous prices for the food and wine. And no fear of northern priests, apparently: a dice game
rattled in one corner, a card game shuffled at another table, and aesa smoke twisted and faded in the
breeze coming through several wide windows. The smell of cloves, ginger, and other exotic spices from
past the Horn drifted in the room, and the dishes carried past on large silver platters steamed richly with
their own unfamiliar aromas.
No corner tables were open, which obviously would have been Scratha's first pick; finally the man
settled for a table against the wall, near the dice game. A serving girl arrived at their table seconds after
they sat down. Her clothing hovered just on the edge of propriety and drew attention to places Idisio
didn't think he should stare at. He dropped his gaze to the table.

Page 99

“Southern white wine,” Scratha said to the serving girl. “And for you?” she asked, shifting a little as she
looked at Idisio. The move put her round hip entirely too close; she smelled of sweetened ginger. Idisio
shut his eyes.
“Get him the same,” Scratha said. “And a platter of whatever that dark-haired girl just brought by,
enough for both of us.”
“Yes,s'e ,” the girl said.
Idisio kept his eyes shut until Scratha said, voice matter-of-fact, “She's gone. You're safe.”
Idisio risked a glance; the girl had left. Scratha seemed thoughtful rather than amused.
“My eyes are tired, that's all,” the boy said, knowing it sounded lame.
Scratha left it alone. “Have you ever heard of aqeyva?”
Idisio blinked. “Ack what?”
“I didn't think so,” Scratha said. “It's an old discipline; not many people still know it.”
“Fighting?” Idisio said.
“Not entirely. It's a discipline, and I can see you need that badly.”
“What makes you say—”
“Pretty girls,” Scratha said succinctly, his mouth twitching in clear amusement. Idisio bit his lip and looked
away, deeply embarrassed. “I'll start teaching you tonight, after you talk to the girl at the stables.”
“I don't even know her name,” Idisio protested, suddenly not wanting to talk to or even look at another
female form tonight. “Or where to find her.”
“Go back to the stables,” Scratha said. “She likely sleeps there.”
Idisio sighed. “Yes, Master.”
Further conversation ended with the arrival of their meal: two enormous, glazed earthenware bowls each
containing a generous portion of meat, tender, dark, and rich with spices; a pile of noodles; long strips of
steamed root vegetables; snap peas still in the shell; and black beans in a tart sauce.
Scratha had only finished half of his meal when Idisio scraped the last of the meat juices from his bowl
and let out a satisfied belch. Scratha raised an amused eyebrow; Idisio shrugged, sat back and said,
briefly, “Stables.” He received an equally short nod in response, stood, and left the room.
Stars glittered high and distant overhead; the half moon still lurked low in the sky. Just enough light from
torch and moon filtered over the gravel path to let him make his way to the stable without fear of
stumbling. Idisio paced his step to a casual amble. He didn't want to look like he was rushing to see the
girl again, or hurrying to the stable for whatever reason. Moving fast drew attention.
A sudden cold fear rose in his gut; would this girl, too, be murdered when he arrived? He put the thought

Page 100

aside, scolding himself for being foolish, and forced his quickened step to slow again.
He found her sitting on a bench set against the wall to one side of the stable doors, staring at the stars
with an expression of weary contentment. She watched him come up the path without comment, and
moved over to make room for him to sit beside her.
He hesitated, then sat, feeling awkward and stupid again.
“I didn't get your name,” he said. “I'm Idisio.”
“Riss,” she said, and leaned back against the side of the stable, drawing her feet up to rest on the edge of
the bench. The move put her face behind him; he scooted back, balancing his own heels on the edge.
She smiled, her gaze on the stars above, and said without looking at him, “Did you decide if you want
your horse back yet?”
“My master hasn't decided,” Idisio said.
Riss turned her head to stare at him. Torch-cast shadow dappled her face. Nearby, a long, leafy branch
swayed in the light breeze, shifting dark lines erratically across her pale hair. “You didn't come here just
to get my name. What do you want?”
Idisio knew when he could dance around a topic and when a straight answer was the only way to go.
“Karic and Baylor.”
“Karic's the Kybeach runner,” she said. The darkness made her expression hard to read. “Anytime
there's news, he brings it, stays for a day or two, and goes back.”
Idisio waited, and after a few moments she added, “Baylor was runner for a couple of weeks when
Karic was sick.”
The boy stared at his feet, frowning. “Why did they both run from us in Kybeach?”
“You think I know?” the girl said with a shrug.
“Yes,” Idisio said. “You care about the horses too much to just give over without a good reason.”
He didn't look up, but he could feel the girl studying him critically.
“You're smarter than you look,” she said.
“Thanks.”
She ignored the heavy edge in his voice. “You're welcome. What do I get for telling you?”
Idisio had an offer ready. “A gold round.”
“No, thanks.”
He looked at her, astonished. Nobody turned down money. Especially not that much money. “Two
rounds?” he said, tentative, hoping Scratha wouldn't be angry at the amount.

Page 101

“I don't want money,” she said. “I want you to take me with you when you leave.”
He stared at her, speechless.
“I'm not offering to pay my way with my body,” she said sharply, “so you can just stop looking at me like
that.”
“No!” Idisio said, feeling color rush to his face instantly. “That's not what I—”
“I'm tired of being here, that's all,” she said, cutting him off. “I'm tired of being a woman in a small village,
where everything's going to be the same for the rest of my life. I'm tired of seeing people ride in, talking
about wonderful places far away, and then leave for more adventures while I sit here mucking out stalls
and currying horses.”
He shook his head against the torrent of words, at a loss for a response.
“If you won't take me,” she said with fierce intensity, “I won't say another word.” She rose and stormed
into the barn.
Idisio stared up at the stars, shaking his head wordlessly for some time, mouth opening and closing like a
landed fish.
Eventually he sighed and followed her into the barn.

“No,” Scratha said. “No. Absolutely not.”
“I gave my word,” Idisio said.
“Your word means nothing in this.”
Idisio shrugged. “As you like. I'll tell her she's not going after all.” He started to turn.
“Wait,” Scratha said.
Idisio looked back, keeping his gaze guileless and inquiring. “That was too easy.” Scratha studied him for
a moment, his dark face drawing into a fierce, intimidating scowl. “She did tell you something, and you're
not going to tell me, are you?”
“I made a promise,” Idisio said. “If she doesn't go, she didn't tell me anything.”
“Mmph.” After a long moment, his master nodded. “All right. What did the girl say?”
Idisio relaxed a little. “Karic's the town runner for Kybeach. A couple times, he couldn't make it, and
Baylor came instead. The town runner before Karic was a man named Gessen; he ran the news for
fifteen years before disappearing one day. Riss said it was odd, that Gessen disappeared just when he
did, but she wouldn't tell me why. That's part of what she's going to finish telling us once we're on the

Page 102

road.”
Scratha sighed and pressed the bridge of his nose with his fingertips.
“Worthless,” he said. “Is there anything else that might be of value?”
“She wouldn't say anything else,” Idisio said. “Not until we're on the road and she's sure of us, she said.”
Scratha barked humorless laughter. “Sure ofus ? What of our safety around her?”
“She's not. . . .” Idisio started, then fell silent.
“Anyone that manipulative isn't one I'll sleep easy around,” Scratha said. “Keep your eyes off her chest
and on her eyes, Idisio. I'm starting to get used to having a servant now; I don't want to lose you.”
Idisio nodded glumly.
“For my part,” Scratha said, “while you were out, I managed some information-gathering myself.” He
looked smug now. “Somewhat more valuable than your own.”
“From the innkeeper?” Idisio said.
Scratha's gaze sharpened again. “How did you know?”
“You were practically drooling over her.” Idisio flinched as the words came out of his mouth, unable to
believe he'd been so cheeky; but Scratha shook his head, unoffended.
“There's a free room she holds aside for runners,” he said, “but Karic and Baylor always stayed at a
house near the edge of town, a place with a bad reputation. She'd like to see the people there run out of
town, but they've got too much influence with the new village elder; another man she doesn't think highly
of. She says he stepped up to lead a little over a year ago. The last elder died childless, so the village
gathered to choose a new one. This new man surprised everyone; nobody seems to admit choosing him,
but he landed the post.”
“She likes gossip, or did you tickle her toes for that much?” Idisio said.
Scratha smiled, looking like a well-fed cat.
“Neither,” he said. “We're related.”
Idisio stared, mouth hanging open. “What?”
“In the Great Hall of Scratha Fortress,” Scratha said, “hangs a huge tapestry tracing our ancestry to
before the Split. Every desert Family has one. I've spent a fair amount of time looking at it over the last
few years; for one thing, I had to add in the death dates.” He cleared his throat and looked away for a
moment, expression bleak. “One name I wasn't sure of: a girl who ran away from an arranged betrothal. I
heard the story many times, and the tapestry had no death date for her. I always wondered, and I always
hoped, but I was too afraid to go looking and find out.”
“Cida,” Idisio guessed.

Page 103

Scratha nodded. “Cida,” he said. “The innkeeper'ss'e-natan —her father's mother. Cida apparently ran
away with a stableboy she'd fallen in love with; that was never mentioned in the story I heard, but I'd
guess that's because it was too shameful to admit. She walked out on an important political betrothal,
after all.” He smiled. “Cida had four children, two boys and two girls, and each of those had children.
Alre—which is an old family name, by the way—is the only one who stayed in the area. The rest have
scattered throughout the kingdom; doing very well, from what she says, and none have the least idea that
they're related to Scratha. She's the only one who knows the full story; she chose not to pass it on to any
of her children.”
Idisio shook his head, impressed. “Lucky you came this way after all, then,” he ventured.
But Scratha's gaze had turned distant; he frowned, seeming not to hear Idisio's comment. “It should have
been passed down,” he murmured, as if to himself. “I have some searching to do.”
“Why?”
“Because my family is matrilineal,” Scratha said, focusing on Idisio again. “If there's a straight female line
remaining, I want them back in the fortress where they belong. From what she says, the female line is
north of the Forest, probably in Isata.”
“What if they—or she—isn't interested in going south?”
Scratha shook his head. “I won't have the fortress empty any longer than I have to,” he said. “It's a
tremendous relief to know that my line hasn't ended with me after all. Although I'm sure mys'e-natan
would have been horrified to hear of the Scratha line being mixed with northern blood, I'll take it with
gratitude.”
Idisio decided not to press the question of reluctant relatives. Something in his master's expression
warned that it was time to shift the subject. “So what's the innkeeper's relation to you?”
“S'e-natan-kait. I think you'd call it mother's-side cousin, twice removed; but that's a cold, short way to
say it,” Scratha said, visibly relaxing. “I don't care much for your northern tongue sometimes.
S'e-natankait covers that it's not a straight matrilineal relationship, and there's status involved . . . it would
take too long to explain.” He sat down on the edge of the bed and kicked off his boots. “We leave at
first light. Tell your girl to be ready.”
“She's not my—” Idisio started.
“Don't be so literal. Go.”
Idisio stomped out, feeling thoroughly aggrieved and not quite sure why.

The back of his neck was wet. His shoulders were wet. His hair was wet. His feet were soaked. And
seeing his master riding in comfort, whistling to himself quietly, only worsened Idisio's temper.
It was, of course, his own fault. He'd let himself fall prey to Riss's intent, thoughtful stare, and wound up
offering to let her ride. Moments later he'd been trudging sullenly beside the horse, because somehow
riding with her behind him, or before him, seemed like too much invitation to embarrassment.

Page 104

Heshould have followed their example and taken his hooded cloak out of his saddlebags as soon as the
clouds started to gather overhead, but he'd been lost in brooding until the first splash on his nose woke
him to the impending deluge. After a frantic scrabble in the bags, he'd got the cloak on just a few
moments too late. He wasn't cold, not at this time of year; the air was muggy and the rain warm. But he
hated being wet, and hated being laughed at more. He couldn't prove they were laughing at him, but he
couldfeel it.
So now he slogged, increasingly angry, along a muddy road with a steady grey curtain of torrential rain
coming down around them. They found nowhere to stop, no shelter to be had, and even if he'd been
riding double with Riss their pace would have been held to the same slow plod because of the mud and
the poor visibility.
Even the News-Riders that passed by barely managed more than walking speed. The Riders and their
mounts, covered in froth and spattered mud, looked even more miserable than Idisio.
“I should have stayed in Bright Bay,” Idisio muttered. “I always had somewhere dry to sit out the
afternoon storms.”
“You're welcome to go back,” his master said without turning, his voice sharp.
Idisio's heart skipped a beat, accelerated briefly, then slowly stuttered back to normal. How had the man
heard him? He hadn't spoken loudly, and the pouring rain should have masked the words.
“Sorry, Master,” he said.
Riss slanted a questioning stare at him. So she hadn't heard his words; that was some reassurance. He
shrugged in response and went back to staring at the ground.
Not long after that, Scratha said, “Village ahead.”
Idisio looked up. The rain had finally thinned, and buildings could be seen through the grey haze, sturdy
ghost-shapes that grew more solid the closer they came.
“Must be Sandsplit village,” Riss said, annoyingly cheerful.
“Sandsplit?” Idisio said before he could stop himself. “What kind of stupid name is that for a village?”
Riss shrugged. “It's a coastal town, and it sits at the crossroads of the Forest Road, the Sandlaen Port
Road, and the Ugly Swamp Road; name makes sense to me.”
Her reasonable tone only annoyed him more.
“Stupid,” he said, wanting a reaction from her, a good fight, anything to take his mind off how his feet
squished and his hair plastered flat against his neck.
She ignored him. Scratha ignored him. They passed the first fences, wattle-woven constructions within
which pigs as sullen as Idisio huddled under cover. On the other side of the road, a chachad bird
screamed challenge as they passed, its bright red throat puffing out alarmingly; it ruffled equally red
feathers into a wide-winged show of ferocity and stalked along the fence line on long black legs. Idisio
caught glimpses of threetoed, wickedly taloned feet before the mud covered them on the next stride.

Page 105

Idisio stuck out his tongue at the huge bird.
“Brave from over here, aren't you?” Riss said from above him. “Why don't you go within the chachad's
reach and do that? Who's being stupid now?”
He glared up at her. “Get off my horse.”
“All right,” she said, pulled the horse to a halt and slid off, landing lightly in the mud. She proffered the
reins to Idisio, a smile on her face that missed pleasant by just a hair.
Scratha dismounted as well, turning a dark stare on Idisio that cooled his temper immediately. “Your
horse?”
Idisio swallowed.
“Sorry, Master,” he muttered again.
Scratha pinned him with that glare for another moment before shaking his head and turning away.
Wordlessly gesturing for Idisio and Riss to follow, he led his horse towards a long, low-roofed building
nearby. Wide double doors and a horseshoe nailed to the left of the door marked it as a stable.
The wide doors slid open as they approached, and two grooms came out, both women. They gave the
wet, tired horses critical, assessing looks, accepted the coin Scratha handed them, and led the beasts
away with a minimum of conversation.
Saddlebags in hand, the travelers slogged through the steamy damp to the next building, which had been
painted a cheerful blue and had a bed painted on the door. A carefully lettered wooden sign hung over
the door.
“Traveler’s Rest,” Scratha sighed. “How creative. Let's get inside before it starts raining again.”
The door opened into a wide, dim room lit by a handful of table-lanterns and what grey light came
through the flawed glass blocks of the few windows. There were a scattering of tables and chairs, all
sturdy, all heavily worn and scarred by years of use. A few people looked up as the travelers passed,
examined them with vague indifference, then returned to their low-voiced conversations.
The desk at the far end of the room seemed to serve as both bar and inn desk; Scratha headed for it
without hesitation.
“One room, three people,” he said to the innkeeper, a thin man with small, dark eyes, grey streaks in his
dark hair, and heavy pox-scars on his face.
The innkeeper looked them over with more interest than the people at the tables had shown. His gaze
fixed on Scratha longest.
“One room for three?” he repeated. “What name do you give,s'e ?”
“Gerau Sa'adenit.”
“Gerau Sa'adenit?” the innkeeper said, his small dark eyes narrowing. “Hold a moment. News-Rider left

Page 106

something for you this morning.” He reached under the counter. “Two silver rounds for the three,” he
added, putting something wrapped in dark, waterproofed fabric in front of them. “One bed in the room.
All we have left.” He ostentatiously avoided looking at Riss as he spoke.
Frowning, Scratha took the packet and slid it into his saddle bag. He shot Idisio a quick, questioning
look; Idisio nodded.
Scratha handed the innkeeper the silver and said, “Do you serve food here,s'e ?”
“Wine only,” the innkeeper said, “and that only in rainy season. Rain wine, I call it. It's wind wine up
north.”
“Mulled wine?” Scratha said.
The innkeeper nodded. “Pot on the fire now, if you'd like some. Silver bit each cup, and a finer drink you
won't find short of Stecatr. You can eat next building over, at the Grey Salt Tavern, or you can try the
Raven's Wing a bit further down; it's cheaper but not as good food.”
“You're from the north?” Scratha said, handing over another silver round. “Keep it.”
“For that, you can drink the pot dry, if you like,” the man said with a smile that showed gapped and
crooked teeth. “Yes, I used to live in Stecatr. Fine city, fine people, but my bones got to aching so much
in the cold winters, I decided to move south. I was told profits were soaring down here, with all the new
traveling going on; and so far that's held true.”
“How long ago was that?” Scratha said.
“Oh, not long,” the man said. “Four months or so. Met a man wanting to move northwards; he bought
my Stecatr inn, I bought his, easy trade. We're both happy. Odd thing, he didn't seem the type to run an
inn; but that's not my never-mind. He paid a goodly price for my place, and let me pay far too little for
his. Eh, his foolishness. But you'll be wanting to get to your rooms and dry off now; I'll get another pot of
rain wine going, to make sure you'll have plenty when you come back out. Third room on the right, down
that hallway. I'll send a girl with some towels.” The man grinned at them, bobbed his head, and hurried to
a table whose occupants were signaling for more wine.
Scratha smiled. “Well,” he said quietly as he ushered them from the main room, “there's at least one
uncomplicated man left in this world. Nice to know.”
“Don't you mean honest?” Riss asked. “That's the saying, one honest man left in this world.”
Scratha shook his head, still smiling, and didn't answer.

The Grey Salt Tavern was the sort of place Idisio would once have considered prime pocket-picking
ground. Even now his hands twitched a bit from habit, and he found his eye drifting to thick purses and
wallets carelessly attached to broad waistlines.
Scratha's hand clamped casually, if a near-bruising hold could be called casual, on Idisio's shoulder a

Page 107

moment later: no mistaking the message. Idisio ducked his head and focused on the floor. The grip shifted
to a light touch, but Idisio’s mood had already gone sour.
He’d felt so much better after a hot mug of rain wine, a thorough rubdown with damp cloth and dry
towel, a change of clothes, and a hasty finger-rake through his hair to tidy it up a bit. He'd felt, for just a
few precious moments, like his old, cocky, sure self. But Scratha's stern pinch brought him back to the
moment, reminding him that all the skills he'd been so proud of mastering, as a street-thief, were worse
than useless now.
They settled at a table, Idisio still keeping his gaze firmly on nearby things and doing his best to avoid any
appearance of casing the other customers. He didn't need another look, anyway; he knew everything he
needed to know.Wouldhave needed to know, he corrected himself hastily. He wasn't a thief any more.
That had been survival, not something he loved or needed to do.
But at least he'd been agood thief. Now he'd become a moderately adept servant to a banished desert
lord pretending to be an ordinary person. The morning and evening lessons Scratha had set him on
reading and writing were hard, and frustrating, and made him feel stupid; and though the aqeyva lessons
hadn't started yet, he had a feeling they'd be even worse.
He didn't like feeling stupid. He didn't like being laughed at. His master could get along with Riss as a
servant, couldn't he? And a couple of those gold rounds would take Idisio a long way, and likely
wouldn't be missed for a while. Idisio could. . . .
. . . could sneak away with a few coins and fewer skills and wind up working the streets of another city,
a northern city, one that Scratha would eventually pass through. Returning to Bright Bay was out of the
question. He'd be laughed out of town, at best; at worst, picked up by the King's Guards and taken into
the royal presence to explain his return without Scratha. He likely wouldn't survive long in any case, and
he'd never be happy working as a pick-thief in any city, not after seeing the glory that came to hand when
one had noble status or real money to spend.
And it seemed likely Scratha would take Idisio's desertion as personal insult, or proof of deep lies all
along, and hunt him down to put that remaining ebony-handled blade in his back.
He glared at his hands and didn't look up when the server came to take their order.
“Idisio,” Scratha said, snapping his fingers impatiently, then, to the server, “Oh, hells, give him some more
mulled wine. It might sweeten his temper. All round, yes. Thank you. And a meal, whatever's hot and
fast.” The server went away again. “Idisio. Look at me or I'll knock you across the damn room.”
Idisio raised his head. “Yeah?” The look in Scratha's eye made selfpreservation kick in, and he modified
it to, “Yes, Master?”
His master's mood had darkened since their arrival as well. While Idisio sponged off road grime, Scratha
sat in a comfortable armchair and read the folded sheets of parchment the News-Rider had left for him,
all covered with tightly scrawled writing. Scratha started frowning almost at once, and by the time he'd
finished reading, his expression could have melted sand into glass.
He still looked in no mood to tolerate disrespect from a scruffy streetthief turned lackluster servant. His
tone remained distinctly sharp as he said, “It's time to ask Riss to fulfill her promise, as we've carried her
this far. I thought you might like to hear it, as you seem to like getting answers to your questions.”

Page 108

“Yeah,” Idisio said, straightening with real interest now, and offered an apology that was close enough to
truth: “Sorry. Rain always makes me grumpy.”
“Mmph,” Scratha said, and turned his stare to Riss without more comment.
She stared back as fiercely and said, “You don't hit him again. Ever. Not even a threat.”
Idisio stared, his jaw loosening at that unexpected demand, and Scratha looked as taken aback himself.
Silence hung, uncomfortable and taut, for a few breaths as Scratha stared at Riss; then he transferred his
gaze, more thoughtful now, to Idisio.
“All right,” he said at last, in an oddly muted tone. “I won't. Nowtalk .”
She shifted uncomfortably, all aggression fading. “Well. . . .”
Scratha put a hand over his eyes and sighed noisily.
“I should have known,” he murmured.
“You don't actually know anything?” Idisio demanded, appalled. “Youliedto me?”
“Oh, shut up!” she flared. “Like you would have done different.” She dropped her head on her arms and
began to cry.
Scratha regarded the girl without surprise or sympathy. “At least you didn't try to hand off another pack
of lies,” he said. “Tell us what you do know about Karic and Baylor. The truth, this time. Not the horse
trading nonsense.”
She straightened, sniffling, and squinted at him dubiously. “How'd you know? I thought you bought it.”
“Iwas watching your eyes, not your chest,” Scratha said tartly.
She colored a deep and honest red; Idisio felt his own face flare to match.
“Why was it so important for you to get out of Obein?” Scratha asked. “What are you running from?”
She twisted her hands together on the table, the crimson of her face washing away to a stark pale
nervousness.
“It's all together,” she said, barely audible, and stared at her hands as she went on, “Karic . . . always . . .
well, he was nice, at first. He came by every time he was in town . . . and said I was pretty . . . and . . . I
mean, normally I wouldn't fall for that, but he was so. . . .” She made a vague gesture with one hand, not
looking up, then immediately clenched them together again.
“He seduced you,” Scratha said, sounding more impatient than sympathetic. “So?”
She flinched a bit at his tone and snuck a hasty glance at his face. “Well, he always brought a bottle of
wine with him. And it seemed odd, somehow, but I could never figure why, exactly, except that he
seemed more fond of ale than wine.” She shrugged, her lips thinning. “I thought wine was more romantic,
anyway, so I didn't give it much thought at first. Then I started wondering where he was getting the wine;
it was in a strange blue bottle, like I've never seen made along the coast or sold in our tavern. I asked him

Page 109

about it. He said it was a southern wine and specially made, that he only brought me the best.”
Scratha's face became grim. The server brought three mugs of hot wine, but nobody touched them as
Riss went on, still staring at the table. She seemed relieved to be spilling the story.
“One night, not long ago, he said he'd meet me, in the stables, where we always. . . .” She swallowed
convulsively, her hands clenching more tightly for a moment. “He ran late, and I went to find him. I was
worried. I knew the people he spent time with weren't . . . nice people. I thought they might have hurt
him, because he said that he was getting out of their company. He said he had a bigger contract to hand,
and that he'd be rich soon, and not need to run news and messages across little coastal towns. And I
thought, maybe, they'd gotten angry at him for leaving . . . I don't know. I just got scared, and went to
find him.”
The chatter of the tavern and plates of food being set in front of them filled the silence while she visibly
tried to find words for what had happened next. Idisio cast a hungry eye at the platter but knew better
than to touch it just yet; he'd eat it cold, most likely, but better that than annoy Scratha by interrupting the
girl's story.
“I hadn't realized. . . .” she said at last, almost whispering again. “I'd thought he just didn't understand . . .
what kind of friends he'd chosen. I wasstupid.”
“What did you see?”
She looked up, then away, then down at her hands again, as if wishing for a way out of saying it aloud. “I
didn't dare go in, not alone, not in the evening like that, but I looked in an open window. And he was just
picking up one of the blue bottles, and setting down coin for it. I heard him talking. Heard him saying . . .
that he needed to start buying two bottles soon, because I was building a tolerance. . . .” She dropped
her head in her hands and fell silent.
“Had to be dasta in the wine,” Scratha said with immense distaste, and grimaced. “Damnit. Was he
dealing, or just buying?”
“Dealing, I think,” she said in a muffled voice. “A lot of things made sense after I saw that, questions I'd
never really thought about because I was too eager to keep his favor . . . I thought he loved me.”
“So what happened then?”
“I ran back to the stables, and rousted the other stable lad from his sleep, and told him I was feeling ill
and to plead apologies to Karic when he came by, and I ran off and hid and cried half the night. And in
the morning, he'd left. I didn't see him again until this last time.” She straightened, her eyes damp but her
voice steady. “Of course he came by to see me, and had that damn bottle, and I told him I knew what
he'd been doing, and that I didn't want him near me again. And he said that I was an idiot for turning him
away, and that I'd misunderstood a coarse joke. I didn't believe him, I told him to go away and stay
away, and he laughed. He said I'd be crawling back to him soon enough, and he left. But then Baylor
came in on that stolen horse, and I couldn't help it, I had to find out what was going on, so I followed
them . . . they went around the corner of the stables to talk, and I crept close and listened. . . .”
She paused, her lips thinning, a hard light in her eyes.
“I'm not cut out for stealth,” she said simply. “They caught me.”

Page 110

Scratha pursed his lips and said nothing. Idisio, horrified, didn't know what to say. They all sat staring at
each other for a long moment of dreadful silence.
“They dragged me back into the stables with a hand over my mouth and a knife at my throat to keep me
quiet,” she said in an eerily even tone. “The stable lad was gone, it was my turn on duty that night. I
usually am; I like being awake at night . . . Anyway. Karic brought out a little bottle, about this tall—”
She held thumb and forefinger apart to illustrate. “— and made me drink it all. And said nobody would
believe me and that if I even tried telling people what happened, his friends at the edge of town would get
me. And that I was to lie to you, and tell you they ran north, through the Great Forest. But I know they're
going south, to Sandlaen Port, and I know they have a contact here in Sandsplit named Yuer.”
Scratha started at that name; his face seemed to darken instantly.
“Yuer!” he said. “Gods help us all,he's involved in this? And he liveshere ? I thought . . . hells. Go on.”
She shrugged, looking down at her hands again, her back straight and stiff. “I don't remember much after
that. I woke up the next morning out in the main aisle of the stable, with several people, locals and
travelers, staring at me; I wasn't . . . dressed, and I reeked of wine and . . . well.” Her mouth tightened.
“You know. And Karic was right, nobody believed me. They said I'd been acting the whore with Karic
for months, and everyone knew I was nothing but a useless slut, and even my own parents turned me out
for shaming them. The stable master only kept me on and let me sleep in the stables because I'm so good
with the horses, but the way he looked at me—he'd have cornered me himself soon enough. And after
that would come the village. I couldn't . . . I couldn't stand that. I'm stupid, but I'mnot a whore.”
“And what did you hear Karic and Baylor talking about before they caught you listening?” Scratha
asked, his frown unwavering.
She ducked her head. “That they'd killed a girl, back in Kybeach.” Her voice broke. “And they'd tried to
put the blame on an outsider, and it wasn't working, and so they had to run. That's when they caught
me—I gasped when I heard them talking about murdering the girl, and they heard me.”
Scratha tilted his head to one side, frowning at her. “Mmph. And that was two nights ago now?”
She nodded mutely. He studied her for a moment more, then shook his head.
“Eat,” he said abruptly, turning his attention to his own plate. “I need to think about this, and it's best
done on a full stomach.”
The steam had long ago faded from the platters, but even cold the food tasted good. Idisio shoveled it
down enthusiastically, feeling a bit guilty that her horrible story hadn't dimmed his appetite in the least.
Scratha ate with equal speed and gusto, while Riss picked over her plate listlessly, her determined show
of strength fading at last.
After the plates had been cleared away, Scratha sat back and said, without preamble, “Look at the
mugs. Now close your eyes and tell me what they look like. Riss, you first.”
Riss cleared her throat uncertainly. “It's . . . it's grey. It's made of metal. It's got a design on the side.
Something with animals. A fox and some birds, I think.”
“Idisio?”

Page 111

“Silver alloy,” Idisio said promptly. “Stands about as high as my hand is long, about as wide around as
my palm. Handle embossed with birds in flight, body boss of three birds being stalked by a fox. I don't
know what's on the side away from me, but I'd guess it's probably the three birds in flight and the fox
missing on the pounce. There's a dent on the near side rim. That's all I remember.”
Nobody spoke for a few moments.
“Open your eyes,” Scratha said finally.
Riss had developed a glazed look. “How in the s'iopes' seven hells did you remember all that?”
Scratha grinned. Idisio had never seen him look so pleased.
“Very good, Idisio,” he said.
Idisio relaxed, feeling a sudden glow. “Thanks.”
“Riss,” Scratha said, “you'll learn. Don't worry. It's impressive that you remembered as much as you did.
You'll both take to aqeyva lessons just fine.”
“Ack what?” Riss said, and looked confused when Idisio and Scratha started laughing.
Scratha pushed to his feet, dropping a generous amount of coin on the table. “Let's go. I want to talk to
Yuer before we turn in for the night. I've some questions for him, and I want both of you along as
witnesses.”
With those alarming words, he ushered them out of the tavern.

Chapter Ten
The bulk of Water's End sheltered in a natural bowl. Cliffs rose to all sides, some over a hundred feet
high, and the path sloped steep and narrow down a hand-carved pass in the ancient rock. Sentries
dressed in eyecatching white perched high along the cliffs: steady on impossibly thin ledges, supported by
sturdy rope and leather harnesses. Long metal braces lined the tops of the cliffs; by the look of it, the
sentries could slide sideways several feet in either direction.
To Alyea, the engineering of those braces seemed as much a marvel as Oruen's solarium. How could
they secure perfect metal rods into solid rock? Incredible. But this wasn't the time to ask about that.
“Are those teyanain?” Alyea asked Chac after a single swift, furtive glance upwards.
“No,” the old man said. “Their authority stops at the ridge we just crossed. Water's End has its own
guards. Every desert lord tithes to support Water's End; some of them send their young men and women
to train here as guards for a time. It's something of a coming-of-age ritual, serving time here as a guard.”
He glanced up and sighed.

Page 112

“Did you serve here?” Alyea asked, prompted by the wistfulness in the old man's expression.
“Yes,” Chac said, and pulled his horse to a halt. “Lead your horse down by hand.”
Alyea glanced back as she swung off her horse. Micru had already dismounted and stood ready, hand on
bridle. “Do the guards get upset if you ride down?”
“No,” Chac said. “Trail's too tricky to ride.”
“What about caravans?”
“Different trail,” Chac said. “There's three north trails. One two-way trail for caravans; you have to pay
to use that one, and it's a hefty fee. One free trail for walking out, one free trail for walking in.”
The rocky, sandy ground underfoot proved slippery and treacherous. Alyea placed her feet with care
and tried to avoid having her horse step on her toes. That quickly turned out to be a lost cause as they
slipped and scrambled their way down the narrow trail.
“Why . . . isn't . . . the trail . . . wider? Smoother?” Alyea panted halfway down. Sweat trickled down her
face, funneling into her thin shirt; she'd look a proper mess when they reached bottom.
“Why should it be?” Chac said over his shoulder. He moved like a cat over the uneven ground, guiding
his horse easily, and didn't seem the least bit out of breath. “Deep southerners don't want much to do
with the northlands. This serves as a natural barrier to kings that get a mad notion of taking over the
desert Families' lands. If anything gets past the teyanain, they won't make it past this.”
The idea of an invading army trying to make it down this slope brought a sour smile to Alyea's lips.
“What about the other trails?” she said, jerking her foot away just as a heavy hoof slammed down. Hard
boots weren't helping; her feet felt bruised and she suspected at least one toe might be broken already.
“Or ports?”
“The other trails both have their own tight spots, and you have to have a recognized guide to make it
through,” Chac said. “The ports wouldn't be friendly to invasion attempts, either.” He fell silent, his
attention on navigating a tricky turn.
They were nearly at the bottom of the trail. Water's End spread out before them, a patchwork of stone
buildings, some two and three stories; tents, at the edges, and even, incredibly, lush patches of garden
greenery. Alyea had been expecting something much cruder, from Chac's comment at the first way-stop.
“I thought you said Water's End wasn't much,” she said as they descended onto relatively level, wide
ground again.
“Never said that,” the old man said. “Just said it was a larger version of the way-stops, and it is. Prettier,
too.” He drew a deep breath and surveyed the area as the guards finished the descent and gathered
behind them.
Alyea looked as well, and forgot her sweat, her disheveled appearance, the dirt and dust on her clothes,
her aching feet.

Page 113

The scent of desert rose and whitemusk flowers, feather-herbs and bitter onion, fresh baked bread and
citrus fruits all clashed in her nose. With a shift of the faint breeze, those aromas faded into the dust, dirt,
and sweat of a busy camp in hot weather. The smell of metal lent a tangy accent to the air, and nearly
everyone seemed to be wearing a sword or dagger.
People wearing brightly patterned, lightweight fabrics filled the winding streets. Most wore their hair
either intricately and tightly braided against their skulls or completely shaven. The predominant skin tone
ranged from dark brown to black, a shade she'd rarely seen in Bright Bay; as Chac had said, the deep
southerners wanted little to do with anything north of the Horn. Here and there she saw the bronze or
burnt-almond skin tone and hawk-like face of an old, noble bloodline; crowds parted before those
visages. The people moving out of the way didn't even seem to glance up first, as if they felt the presence
before seeing it.
A cacophony of laughter and shouting and arguing filled the streets, punctuated by the erratic screams of
caged desert birds. Now and again an asp-jacau howled or whined; there were more of those creatures
here than Alyea had ever seen in one place, all neatly groomed and obediently trotting behind their
masters. Some wore gold, silver, or gem-studded collars; a few had swirling patterns bleached or dyed
into their fur.
Alyea blinked wind-flung dust from her eyes and looked at Chac, feeling overwhelmed and helpless. He
stared at her, his expression thoughtful; when she met his gaze he nodded as if coming to a decision.
“This way,” he said.
The group wound through a seemingly erratic path, past tents, buildings, and gardens, finally halting again
in the courtyard of what must surely be the largest building in Water's End. It stood three stories high,
block upon huge limestone block set and firmly cemented together. The wide windows on the upper
stories were flanked by heavy, metal shutters, currently open and fastened securely back to the sides of
the building.
A nearby stable building, large enough to house fifty horses in comfort, boasted a fenced enclosure with
thick grass and three thick-trunked oaks with huge, abundant foliage. Several horses dozed in the shade
created by those giant leaves, their tails twitching idly.
Small statues of rearing horses, dancing children with jugs in hand, and howling asp-jacaus dotted the
central area. Water poured from each statue into a stone trough, which ran for several feet before turning
into an underground pipe.
“Incredible,” she breathed.
“Aerthraim engineering,” Chac said, sounding smug. “Wait until you see inside.”
Grooms trotted towards them, smiling cheerfully; one rattled off a question: “Ka-s'eias, ahaki t'ass ekita?
Pahaki t'ess?”
“I'm sorry,” Alyea said, “I don't. . . . ”
“T'ass, s'eias, essata; keyassa natoya su-s'a Peysimun,” Chac said. “Let them take your horse, Alyea.”
Feeling suddenly lost, Alyea let the nearest groom lead her horse away. “What did they say?”

Page 114

“They asked if we were staying at the enclave or just stabling the horses for a while,” Chac said. “I told
them we were staying, and gave him your family name so they can bring the baggage to our rooms.”
“What'ska-s'eias ?” Alyea said. “I haven't heard it that way before.S'eias is a mixed group of people;
what does theka make it?”
“It's unique to the deep southlands,” Chac said. “Means they're not sure of our exact status, but know
we're not commoners and want to offer proper respect. 'Honored' is probably the closest translation.
Now that they know you're a northern noble, you'll find everyone calling yousus'a : northern lady.”
“What are they going to call you?” Alyea asked, with a touch of mischief.
Chac's expression went remote. “Chacerly.”
“What, no term of respect?” Alyea teased, and immediately regretted it. Chac didn't even look at her.
His expression changed from remote to stony.
“No,” he said curtly, and started towards the enclave building.
Alyea hesitated before following him. She couldn't imagine what the old man could have done to lose
even the most basic term of courtesy before his name, especially in the deep south where respect
counted for everything. Deiq's words came back to her:the men you ride with aren't the ones to trust . . .
they watch you with the care of men that serve two masters.
For the first time, Alyea wondered if she and Oruen were the ones Chacerly served.
Chac reached the door to the enclave and went inside without even looking behind to see if she followed.
She put her suspicious thoughts aside for the moment and hurried to catch up.

Considerably nicer than the last way-stop, this room held a single bed and a lower cot for a servant to
sleep on. Halla looked around the room, seeming uncertain, and sat on the cot with a lost expression.
“What's the matter?” Alyea asked, dropping her pack on her own bed and sitting next to it.
“I don't know where to go,” Halla said. “I've been asking and asking after my son along the trail, and
nobody knows anything.”
Alyea thought about Chac's lessons on southern custom, sighed, and said, “Halla, I have to explain
something to you.”
She sketched out the obligation concept as clearly as she could. The northern woman looked steadily
more baffled.
“I have to pay for someone to tell me where my son is?” she demanded at last.
“Well, not with coin, and no. . . ” she forestalled the woman's gathering indignation. “Nothing to do with
sex. You don't have to sell yourself. But you have to have something to give in order to get any

Page 115

information about your son.”
“So the people I asked could have been lying?” Halla looked perplexed. “Why would anyone lie to a
mother looking for her son?”
“It's nothing personal,” Alyea said. “That's just the custom here. I'm having to learn it myself; Bright Bay
isn't like that.”
Halla sat brooding, frown gathering deeper, and finally said, “No offense, my lady, but your southern
world is madness.”
“Just different from your customs,” Alyea said. “That's all.”
“No,” Halla said, shaking her head. “Any place where people could lie to a mother seeking her son is
completely mad.”
“They may not have lied,” Alyea said. “They honestly might not have known. Don't think the worst until
you have to.”
“I have nothing to offer,” the northern woman said.
She looked so miserable Alyea couldn't help crossing to sit beside her. She put a hand on Halla's
shoulder. “Chac told me there's an old saying: sooner or later, everything comes through Water's End.
We'll find word of your son here. I'm sure of it. And don't forget, you have some status by being my
servant. Don't be afraid to use my name; it might tip the balance.”
“But won't that put you in debt?” Halla asked dubiously.
“Maybe,” Alyea said lightly, “but I'm sure I can afford it. Go on, go ask around.” She gave the woman a
few small coins. “Buy me one of those wonderful red silk tunics I've seen people wearing around here.”
Not that she wanted the tunic, but the errand would give Halla a reason to be out on the streets talking to
vendors; the northern woman's nod held instant understanding. “It may take me some time,” Halla said,
testing, and Alyea nodded.
“Take as much time as you like,” she said, smiling.
“Thank you, my lady,” Halla said with deep sincerity, and hurried out the door without a backwards
glance.
Still smiling, Alyea crossed to the window and watched: the northern woman emerged into the street and
headed for the market with eyes modestly lowered and a stride that held nothing but purpose. People
moved out of her way, as they did for the desert lords, without really looking; then seemed oddly
perplexed, glancing back over their shoulders at the northern woman.
Behind her, Chac coughed, alerting her to his presence; she halfturned and motioned for him to join her at
the window.
“It's a busier place than I expected,” she said when he stood beside her.
“It's the heart of the southlands,” he said, frowning down at the street. He seemed less than pleased

Page 116

about something. “Where's your maid?”
“I sent her on an errand.”
“Alone? Are you mad?” He stared at her.
She shook her head, remembering how people had moved out of Halla's path. “She'll be fine, Chac.”
“This isn't Bright Bay, damn it,” he said, unaccountably upset, and went to the door. She heard him
speaking with one of the guards in a low voice; he returned to her side a few moments later, his frown
eased only slightly. “They'll find her. Don'tever send her out without an escort to protect her. Don't try
walking alone, yourself, not here. It's not safe. You don't have the status for it just yet. Gods know I've
been trying, but it's not taking hold.”
She turned her head to look at him. “What do you mean, you've been trying? What have you been
doing?”
“While you've been chatting along the way with Deiq,” he said tartly, “I've been trying to arrange alliances
to keep you safe on the road and get us to Scratha Fortress. So has Micru. It's not been going well at all.
We haven't received a single invitation to visit any Family yet. That's bad, Alyea, that's very bad. Past
Water's End, your only source of water and food is the fortresses. You don't just show up at the gates
and bang on the door to say hello. You need an invitation. And we don't have one. Not one.”
“Why didn't you tell me this?” she demanded. “I could have—”
“You don't knowhow ,” he cut her off. “If Deiq hadn't taken an interest in you, I would have introduced
you round each dinner and maybe had better luck; but all they saw was you sitting withhim , and they
wanted no part of that. He's not trusted much, south to north, commoner or noble.”
“You could have said,” she complained.
“Idid tell you to get rid of him,” Chac reminded her impatiently.
She grimaced, wondering if Deiq had understood the impact his attentions would have; if it had been
calculated.I can get you to Scratha Fortress safely, he'd said, and promised help if she asked for it.
“Damn it,” she said aloud.
“Yes.” Chac seemed about to say something else, but then his attention drew sharply to the street again;
she leaned, looking to see what had caught his eye.
Gria and her mother stumbled by below, wrists weighed down with heavy chains and cuffs. The guards in
the party walked very close to the women, and Alyea could make out a dark bruise on the older
woman's face. Sela seemed to be halfway between shock and apoplectic rage; her daughter's expression
alternated between blank and frightened. The machago Ierie, cheerful and smug, sauntered down the
street in front of the small procession.
Alyea felt her chest tighten at the sight. “It isn't fair. It isn't right. They believed him; that's their only
crime.”
“I doubt it,” Chac said. “Do you really think a machago would make the long trip just for one pair of

Page 117

northern women? They upset someone powerful enough to pay a slave-trader to come all the way past
the Horn and steal them away to a place they'd never escape.”
Alyea stared down at the street, hardly seeing the crowds now. The slave trader's party had passed out
of sight now, around a corner.
“Deiq knew,” she said under her breath.
“What?” Chac's attention sharpened on her. He scowled.
“He said he knew what was going on with them,” Alyea said. “But he didn't tell me. I didn't ask,” she
added to the fierce glare the old man directed at her.
“Good,” Chac said. “At least you didthat right.” He rubbed his temples. “I have to go make some
arrangements. I'll be back soon. Stay here; for the love of the gods,don't go out there until I've secured
something for an alliance.” He walked out without looking back.
She sighed and went back to staring out the window.
Not long afterwards, a firm knock rattled the thin door behind her. She crossed the room and opened the
door with her expressionless public face firmly in place, and held to it with all her might a moment later as
machago Ierie grinned at her unpleasantly.
“Lady Alyea,” he said. “A present for you.”
Behind him, the two northern women glared at Alyea as if they held her responsible for the situation. Four
guards loomed behind, their attention completely on the slaves, ready to grab them if they tried to bolt.
The bruise on Sela's face, at close range, looked very dark, and very large.
“Apresent?” she said sharply.
“Fromnu-s'e Deiq,” the man said. “He has purchased these women and wishes me to give them into your
care.”
“When did this happen?” she demanded.
“My lady,” Ierie said, unruffled, “the hallway is not the best place to hold this discussion.”
“You certainly aren't entering my room!” she said before thinking.
He shrugged. “Do you accept this gift or not, Lady Alyea?”
It had been sensible, before, to stay out of the troubles of the northern women. It would be beyond
madness, now, to refuse the gift; another kind of madness to accept. She'd made herself an easy target
for whatever game Deiq had set up. He'd guessed her sympathy for the northern women, and now she
owed him a debt beyond paying, whatever phrasing the machago used to hide it.
If this was a gift, she was an asp-jacau.
“Yes,” she said at last.

Page 118

Smirking, Ierie produced a leather document case and handed it to her. “Your paperwork, my lady. You
are now wholly responsible for thesemac'egas ; the mark on their bands is registered with the Water's
Endhayrar under your name. If they attempt to leave Water's End, by any road, while not in your
presence, they will be stopped and returned to you.”
Alyea felt her stomach curdling from the intensity of Sela's stare.
Ierie stepped aside and motioned for the two women to advance. Alyea opened the door wider and
moved out of the way as the northerns, prompted by an ungentle shove from the guards behind them,
stumbled into her room.
“The cuffs,” Ierie said, “do not come off. They will be slaves, south to north, for the rest of their lives. I
recommend you do not try to take them back into the northlands, but that is your choice entirely. Good
day, my lady.”
He turned and sauntered away, his guards following.
“Gods,” Alyea said under her breath, and closed the door. She stood staring at the plain, scarred wood
for a few breaths, gathering strength and sorting her thoughts, before turning to look at her new slaves.
“You tried to warn us,” Gria said miserably.
“How convenient,” her mother snapped. “And now youown us, do you? Let me tell you, I don't accept
it! I want this cuff off and I intend to bring charges in front of King Oruen!” She brandished her arm at
Alyea, as if intending to use the heavy metal cuff as a weapon.
“He said they don't come off,” Gria said.
“Nonsense. That was just to scare us. We'll be free of this mistake soon.” She fixed Alyea with a stern
glare. “Won't we,my lady ?”
Alyea drew a deep breath and sank into a chair. “No,” she said. “I'm afraid not.”

Chacerly examined the proffered hand soberly. He shook his head after a moment of tapping and poking
at the band, and looked up at Alyea. He'd been furious on finding the two northern women in Alyea's
room, but that anger seemed to have vanished now, replaced with a deep concern.
“I haven't seen this in years. I thought it was a lost art.”
“Art?” Sela said bitterly.
Chac sat back on his heels and looked up at her, then stood. “It is an art,” he said. “What it's used for
may not be. Look—see that silver twisting through the metal?” He pointed to a fine network of shining
lines woven through the duller metal of the slave cuff. “That's calledugren . It's a rare alloy. There's
nothing I know of that cuts or melts it, once it's hardened and set. And as it's contacting your skin, it's
likely bonded to that as well. Attempting to remove the cuffs could rip your flesh right down to the bone

Page 119

beneath.”
Sela stared, her face bone-white. Gria moaned softly, looking ill. “It's not a common slave cuff,” Chac
said harshly. “Whoever hired Ierie to come get you wanted to be damn sure you'd never be considered
free again, north to south.”
Alyea put a hand over her mouth.
“Oh, it gets worse,” Chac said, turning a fierce glare on Alyea. “Far as I know, only ones know how to
put on an ugren cuff without killing the slave are the teyanain. And whenthey get involved,everything goes
to all the hells. On top of it all, you saidDeiq bought these women, and presented them to you as a gift?”
He shook head, lips tight. “What a damn mess. Did you ask him to get involved?”
“No,” Alyea said as strongly as she could without shouting. “Not even a hint.”
Chac studied the northern women for a moment, seeming to consider something, then looked back at
Alyea. His expression had acquired a chilly, frightening detachment. “You have two options,” he said.
“The first one is to find out who they were going to be sold to originally, and send them on to him as a
gift.”
Alyea shook her head. “I won't do that. ”
“Then you have to kill them,” he said.
She stared at him, shocked. Sela whimpered. Gria shivered, huddling closer to her mother.
“They're dangerous by their very presence,” he said. “You're under a debt while they're in your service.
You're involving yourself in political games you know nothing about if you keep them alive, and it could
destroy you. What you're doing is more important than two northern women.”
“If you lay one hand on them, Chacerly,” Alyea said with measured chill, “I will see you stripped and sent
into the deep sands to die.”
They matched glares for a long, silent moment.
“It's safer to be rid of them,” he said. “You don't know what you're doing.”
“I don't believe in killing innocents to save myself some trouble,” she said. “And they're legally mine. Not
yours. I make the decision on this.”
“You're letting emotion drive you,” Chacerly said. “Not reality.”
“I saidno .”
His lip curled for a moment, then he shrugged and said, “As you will, my lady. I'd advise asking them
some very hard questions, if you're still listening to anything I have to say.”
“You're my advisor, Chac,” Alyea said, trying to lighten her tone. “I always listen. I just make my own
decisions about your advice.”
“Talk to them, then,” he said. “Find out what's going on before it catches up to you. I'd offer to help but I

Page 120

doubt you'd care for my methods.”
He turned and left the room without another word, shooting the northerns one final dark, misgiving glance
as he passed. Alyea sighed and let herself fold into a chair. Before anyone could speak, Halla burst into
the room, beaming. Her smile faded as she took in the two women sitting on Alyea's bed.
“What—” she started, a frown beginning to form.
“I'll explain later,” Alyea said, and made a peremptory gesture for the northerns to be silent. “What is it?”
Halla studied the women for another moment, her forehead furrowed in concern. “Perhaps this isn't a
good time?”
“It's as good a time as any other,” Alyea said. “Out with it.”
“Well, it's like this,” Halla said uncertainly. “I . . . I think I've had word of my son.”
“That's good,” Alyea said, unable to summon up more energy for enthusiasm. “What did you hear?”
“I was . . . I went to the washing square . . . and spoke to the other women there. And men! They have
men doing the washing here, my lady.”
Alyea's smile felt more genuine now. “And someone there told you about your son?”
“Well, I said I was looking,” Halla said. She seemed to have forgotten the two sullen northern women. “I
told my story, and explained how I was working for you while I searched for my son. One of the women
said she'd seen a northern boy locally, one with a light slave cuff on; she said that means he was working
off a small debt or something minor, and would be free to go once that was up. She didn't know his
name, but gave me a description and an address.”
“Go find out, then,” Alyea said. “What are you waiting for?”
Halla hesitated again, twisting her hands together nervously. “Well, my lady, I'm fairly sure it's my son; the
description fits, right down to the mole on his cheek. It's just . . . the man he's working for . . . she said it
was Deiq.”
Alyea shut her eyes and muttered, “Why am I not surprised?”
She stood and crossed the room to the small desk. As she'd expected, she found writing supplies inside;
she pulled them out and swiftly wrote a brief note, blotted it, and rolled it up. At a loss for a seal, she
spotted several lengths of ribbon in the drawer and used one to tie the parchment roll securely. The other
three women watched her with varying degrees of silent bewilderment.
Alyea handed Halla the note and said, “Take this to the local judge, thehayrar . It's an affidavit that
Peysimun Family will be personally liable for whatever debt or service your son has incurred, and to
release him into your care immediately. Make them write you a note transferring the liability and take it to
the place your son is staying. I'm sure he'll know who to present the release to.”
Halla held the note as if it were the most precious thing she'd ever seen.
“Thank you, my lady,” she whispered, her eyes filling with tears. “Go on,” Alyea said, and the woman

Page 121

almost ran from the room.
“Does this Deiq make a practice of holding slaves?” Sela demanded before the door had fully shut
behind Halla. “I thought it illegal!”
“In the kingdom, it is; but we're all far from home, Sela. And before you launch another tirade, keep in
mind that Idid try to warn you!”
“And what could we have done?” Sela cried. “Run, and be captured? Or run, and find out you were
lying, and disgrace ourselves beyond hope? What else was there to do?”
Alyea sighed. “Why would anyone want to enslave you in the first place?”
“How should I know?” Sela snapped.
“It cost someone a lot of time and money to bring both of you down here and put those cuffs on your
arms. Why are you so important?”
“You'd know more about southern reasoning than I would,” Sela said nastily.
Alyea rubbed her temples, trying to ease the beginnings of a monstrous headache, and murmured to
herself, “I can see this is going to be a long night.”

Chapter Eleven
The building that rose before them measured no larger than any other in the village, and hardly seemed
as opulent as the palace in Bright Bay. It did, however, have carefully trimmed hedges, neatly shaped
rosebushes, a paved courtyard, a small stable to one side, and two armed guards at the plain wooden
door.
The guards watched them approach without a flicker of emotion crossing their broad faces. Idisio felt a
chill crawling along his spine as he came closer. He'd seen eyes like that before—in men who killed for
coin.
Scratha seemed undisturbed by the cold stare of the guards. He strode up to them as arrogant and
assured as he'd ever been in the King's Palace and stopped just out of their reach.
“We're here to see Yuer,” he announced.
“Yeah, we figured that,” one of the guards said, surveying the three visitors with a dark squint. “Either
that or you want to sell the girl, and she don't look whipped enough for that.”
“Yuer,” Scratha repeated coldly.
“Yeah, go on in. He said you'd be here tonight.”

Page 122

Scratha checked mid-stride and turned a hard stare on the guard. “Excuse me?”
“You're expected,” the guard clarified, and jerked a thumb at the door. “Go on in already. Unless you've
changed your mind about the girl?” He leered at Riss. She shrank back.
“No,” Scratha said, and pushed the door open. He strode in without looking back. Idisio and Riss almost
tripped over each other crowding in behind him.
The small room beyond held little more than a comfortably smoldering fireplace and four low, wide chairs
set around a short-legged round table. Idisio rocked to a stop and stared in unabashed fascination at the
man in the chair facing them.
There was a lot to stare at: skin like a bleached hide pulled too tight over prominent bones and a face
filled with a mass of drooping wrinkles, as if all the spare skin had somehow migrated there. Wispy, dark
hair scraggled along a pale scalp. The man smoothed his long-fingered, almost skeletal hands repeatedly
over a thick, dark red lap-blanket, although Idisio found the room uncomfortably warm.
Bright dark eyes stared back at Idisio, and the man's thin mouth twisted into a wide grin.
“Please, come sit,” the man said in an astonishingly clear bass. The sound of that rich tone coming from
the frail, wrinkled form made Idisio's jaw drop again. “Hot tea?” He leaned forward and lifted the
ceramic teapot, tilting it to fill three small cups with a rich, steaming amber liquid. The scent of cloves and
cinnamon filled the room.
Scratha didn't move. “You expected us.”
“Of course. And I must say it's lovely to see you again, mylord .” He arranged each of the small cups a
little distance apart from each other, choosing each spot with careful precision, then looked up at them.
“Oh, do sit down. I get a twist in my neck so easily these days.”
“I thought you'd gone further north,” Scratha said.
“Oh, it's far too cold up north,” the man said. “Speaking of which, the tea is getting cold.” He blinked at
them with a lizard-bright sparkle in his eyes. “Won't you sit and have tea with me?”
Scratha drew in a long breath, let it out through his teeth, and slowly sat in a chair, motioning Idisio and
Riss to follow suit. Idisio sat down gingerly and reached for a small cup of tea without really thinking
about it. He passed one to Riss and the last to Scratha, uncomfortably aware that the wrinkled man
seemed to be watching him attentively.
“Idisio, Riss,” Scratha said, “this is Yuer.”
“Ah,” Yuer said, reprovingly. “You didn't introduce me properly, my lord. It should have beenferahd
Yuer, son of Lord Regav Darden anddista Atha; you'd saybastard son of a whore , I think, in the
northern tongue.”
Scratha's face tightened. “I saw no need to introduce that.”
“I'm not ashamed of it,” Yuer said. “I can hardly claim to control my birth, can I? And my mother was a
favorite of Lord Regav's until his unfortunate meeting with that Aerthraim bitch.”

Page 123

Scratha's face settled into a dark frown. “Yuer, don't bait me.”
“Still fond of dear old Azni, are you? Well, spare me a moment of fun,” Yuer said. “I have so little of it
these days.”
Scratha shook his head and didn't answer.
“And you think you have no time for my foolishness,” Yuer said. “Well.” He sipped at his tea, his gaze
shifting among them. “Perhaps you don't, at that. But time is an odd thing, isn't it? I recall you saying once
that if you never spoke to me again in this lifetime it would be too soon.”
“You've said the same of me,” Scratha said. “And I've said many things over the years, some of which
should have been left silent.”
Yuer made a faint coughing noise, almost but not quite a sniggering laugh. “Now you admit mistakes?
Could these children have made such a difference? Could you have possibly have grown . . .attached to
them?” His eyes glittered. A chill ran down Idisio's back at the tensions rising in the air.
“Stop it,” Scratha said, his stare as flat and dangerous as a snake's. “That's enough, Yuer. This is today.
If all you're going to do is rake through the past, I'll leave, and then I'll send my report to Lord Oruen.
He'll take great joy in hanging you one piece at a time from each of the Gates.”
In the silence, the sound of rain came pattering gently against the window shutters. Idisio stifled an
impulse to bolt from the room.
“Ah,” Yuer said at last, his voice soft. “You do have a compelling argument there. I am fond of my skin
remaining intact, such as it is.” He poured himself more tea and sipped thoughtfully for a few moments.
Idisio glanced at Riss. She slouched back in her chair, both hands curled round the small cup, looking
deeply unhappy.
“Politics are never simple,” Yuer said at last. “And they reach into the past further than any of us have
been alive, and will echo into the future far beyond our children's lives.”
“Politics or profit?” Scratha said.
Yuer smiled briefly. “Politics is all about profit on some level, whether that be coin or other gain;
successful profit involves understanding politics. You worry over a few pounds of dasta and esthit and
redweed moving south to north, untaxed, illegal. In your mind, it is all wreaking horrible havoc in all lives
involved. But it's such a small, small piece of the overall politics that it's hardly worth noticing . . . unless,
of course, current politics move attention to that tiny piece.” He sighed.
“Dasta is illegal in the northlands,” Scratha said. “The Church bans it, and Lord Oruen has backed that
ban.”
Yuer grinned and shook his head. “A knife is not evil. The hand that holds it can use it to cut bread or cut
throats. Look to the hand, not the knife.”
“I'm looking for the ones who seek out assassins to sell their knives to.”
“Why?” Yuer asked, still smiling. “You're no King's Guard or secret enforcer. Why would you worry

Page 124

over the nonsense of the northlands?”
“I want to know how it gets through the Horn,” Scratha said. “If Darden has corrupted the teyanain,
that's valid desert business.”
“Corrupted?” Yuer's smile broadened. “The teyanain are incorruptible.”
“Then how can they let your carriers move through the Horn?” Scratha said, leaning forward and putting
his cup on the table with a hard click. “There's a two-hundred-year-old agreement on that!”
“Agreements change,” Yuer said. “Initin the Red was a wise man, a good leader, but he couldn't predict
that when he died, his chosen successor would refuse the throne and turn control of the kingdom to a
minor branch of the royal family.”
“What?” Scratha sat up straight, scowling. “You don't believe that old nonsense, Yuer. It's never been
anything but a madman's rumor.”
“Madness for madness,” Yuer said mildly. He poured himself another cup, shook the pot gently, and set
it back down. “I’ll have a servant make more.”
“I want you to explain how you can give any credence to that mad story.”
“Because I know the name of his chosen successor,” Yuer said. “And because the families of Mezarak,
Ninnic, and the other mad kings had never shown any evidence of instability before taking the throne.
Their madness came from a curse laid on the line for forsaking the proper order of things.”
“Who?” Scratha demanded.
“You won't believe me.” Yuer smiled. “You'll call me a liar and a fool.” A faint noise brought Idisio’s
attention to Riss. She'd begun drowsing in her chair, empty teacup held loosely in her hand. The rain must
have put her to sleep; Idisio had to fight the urge to let his own eyelids slide closed.
“Say it and let me judge,” Scratha said.
“Ienna Aerthraim,” Yuer said. “Mother to Asoana Aerthraim, who gave birth to Osenna Aerthraim, who
gave birth to Aziarna Aerthraim, who gave birth to your darling Azaniari Aerthraim. They run a matrilineal
heritage, like Scratha does.”
Idisio found himself blinking rapidly. The list of names had been so similar in sound—a standard
complaint by northerns about the desert Families—that he'd completely lost track. But itsoundedas
though Lady Azni, who had been so kind to him and given him that miraculous salve, should have been in
line for the throne in Bright Bay.
What a different world he would have grown up in if that had come true!
Scratha shook his head slowly. “How did you come to find that out?” “The teyanain keep records of
everything,” Yuer said. “They have books going back to before the Split. Every king had a teyanin attend
his court as a record-keeper since the beginning of the kingdom; that is, up until Ienna refused her calling.
The kings from that point on refused to allow a teyanin the post of record-keeper, and as a result the
royal line bore a curse from that point on.”

Page 125

Riss snored softly. Yuer glanced at her and smiled.
“That's not possible,” Scratha said. “I would have—”
“No,” Yuer said. “You wouldn't have known. Even your beloved Azaniari probably doesn't know. Ienna
wanted no part of a throne; she wouldn't have told her descendants. The Aerthraim have never accepted
a public office that would bring them notice. Ienna passed the throne to one of her lovers.”
“I don't believe any Aerthraim would dishonor her family that way,” Scratha said, and stood, expression
grim. “If all you have to go on are slanderous falsehoods, I'm through listening.”
“I did say you'd call me a liar,” Yuer noted, looking amused. “But I've been through the records of every
desert fortress that would let me in, and a few that didn't know of my presence, before I wasencouraged
to leave the southlands. On my way through the Horn I gained access to the books of the teyanain.
There's no argument with the facts!”
“How did you get into the books of the teyanain?” Scratha demanded.
“I rendered them an indispensable service,” Yuer said, and his grin turned unpleasant. “You don't need
that story. I think this is more important right now.”
“Go on,” Scratha growled, settling back into his chair.
Yuer glanced at Riss, then at Idisio. A faint frown passed across his wrinkled face, barely noticeable.
“First, more tea.”
A gesture brought a quiet servant into the room with a second teapot, almost identical to the first, and
four fresh cups. After tea had been poured and the tiny cups taken in hand, Yuer said, “Those books I
studied . . . each of them from a different point of view, each of them with a tiny piece of the overall truth.
I doubt too many people have seen as many of them as I have, to see such a complete picture.”
“You flatter yourself,” Scratha said, frowning over his tea. “You're no wise scholar, Yuer.”
“Not when you last knew me,” Yuer shot back, “but people do change, don't they? I think I could name
a few myself, and I know you can.” His gaze moved, rather speculatively, to Idisio for a moment.
Scratha snorted and shook his head, but sipped his tea and made no other argument. “Go on with the
story.”
“It's interesting,” Yuer said, leaning forward a little, his eyes narrowing, “that this boy is still awake. I'd
expectedyou to be awake, not him.”
The room suddenly seemed very quiet, and very warm. The soft rain outside faded to an occasionalplink
. Idisio stared at his tea in horrified understanding.
“You tried to drug us?” he squeaked, and bit his lip at the cracked, whiny sound of the words.
“It's always been one of Yuer's favorite games,” Scratha said dryly. He took another sip of tea, his dark
stare fixed on the wrinkled old man. “I'm surprised, myself, that you're still awake.”
Idisio stared at his master, appalled and feeling rather betrayed. “Youknew ?”

Page 126

“I expected it,” Scratha said, not looking away from Yuer. “The question is why he'd risk it.”
Yuer smiled. “I knew I'd at least slow down your servants,” he said. “With them asleep, you'd be less
likely to run before Pieas gets here.”
Scratha sat up straighter. His scowl made Idisio cringe into his chair reflexively, even though he knew he
wasn't the target.
“Pieas!” Scratha said; the name came out as a dire curse.
Yuer smirked. “Yes. I received a bird-messenger this morning that he was on your trail and to hold you
against his coming.”
Scratha snorted. “You think I would haverunfrom that littleta-karne ? He's been all but disowned by his
own family, he's on the run in disgrace, and he's got a blood-right call on his head. I certainly wouldn't
hesitate to kill him, in or out of your home, Yuer.”
Moving with exaggerated care, he pulled several sheets of parchment from his pouch and tossed them on
the table.
“Read it!” he said. “A message from the king's own hand, telling about Pieas's disgrace.”
Yuer grabbed the folded papers. His dark eyes scanned the close-set lines of writing rapidly: page after
page, four in all. He read through them again, more slowly, then looked up at Scratha.
“Pages are missing,” he said.
“The others held no relevance to you.”
Yuer looked down at the pages, shaking his head slowly as he settled back in his chair.
“Disgraced,” he mused, rattling the parchment. “That changes . . . quite a bit.”
“I won't hold the mistake against you,” Scratha said, baring his teeth in a thin, humorless smile. “We all
make mistakes, after all. Even you.”
“Apparently so,” Yuer murmured, his gaze distant. “It seems I have some talking to do with Pieas when
he arrives—which ought to be soon.”
“Even disgraced,” Scratha said, “he's still child of a powerful desert family. I'd advise against killing him
yourself. There's enough other people after him for that.”
“Oh, I'm not too concerned over killing him,” Yuer said, and his expression sent a shiver down Idisio's
back. “I've other methods for expressing how upset I am with him. And other reasons besides this
incident.”
A faint rattling sound, like feet scraping against gravel, came clearly from outside. One of the guards
opened the door and looked in, his broad face furrowed in a frown.
“Man running,” he said briefly. “Got by us, think he was listening. Follow?”

Page 127

Yuer sat up, his face flushing with instant rage. “He waseavesdropping? Onme? Hedared? Yes, gods
damn you, bring him to me!”
The door clacked shut as the guard sprinted away. Scratha and Idisio both leapt to their feet and headed
for the door. Idisio checked just shy of the threshold, turning a worried glance back to Riss, who still
drowsed peacefully in the chair. Yuer flapped a thin hand at him impatiently, the gesture serving as
reassurance and imperious command all at once; Idisio nodded and bolted after Scratha.
Just as they reached the main village road, the light haze of mist condensed into a heavy, thundering
downpour. Idisio's foot hit a mud slick; he went down hard and spat mud along with curses while rolling
clumsily upright. A hard hand caught in his armpit and yanked him the rest of the way to his feet.
“Let the guards get themselves soaking wet searching like fools,” Scratha said in Idisio's ear. “Stables,
Idisio. He'll have to get back to his horse to run anywhere in this weather.”
Idisio slogged after Scratha as fast as he could; whatever had been in that tea seemed to be affecting him
at last. His legs seemed filled with sand and his body worked sluggishly; he fell behind despite his best
efforts, and Scratha disappeared into the downpour ahead.
Unable to move another step, Idisio stopped, panting. Not far ahead, a woman screamed; the sound
jolted him back into motion. A handful of steps later, a thudding sound barely gave him time to fling
himself out of the way as a large black horse thundered by, rider crouched low on its back.
“Looks like he got away,” Idisio muttered, picking himself up off the ground for the second time, and
trudged, in no hurry at all now, towards the stables.
Scratha stood in the center aisle of the stable, his expression bleak as the weather and three deep
scratches threading blood trails down one cheek. He glared at a woman who crouched, weeping, at his
feet.
“Get up already,” Scratha snapped.
She raised a shaking arm over her head and cowered, as if expecting to be struck. Idisio, unable to help
himself, moved forward and crouched beside her. He could feel Scratha's hard glare on the back of his
neck.
A splotch of damp mud slid off his head as he leaned forward; it splatted on the floor right next to the girl.
She flinched further into herself and whimpered.
“S'a?” he said tentatively.
Her thin, bruised face tilted up towards him, revealing wide, wild eyes and a desperate stare.
“Don't let him hurt me,” she whimpered. “Don't let him—”
“He won't hurt you,s'a,” Idisio said. The pattern of bruises and cuts on her face and arms warned him
against trying to touch her right now. Overhead, Scratha breathed heavily. His looming, intimidating
presence filled the air with an almost palpable anger.
Idisio risked saying, “Master Scratha, could you . . . back up a step, please? Maybe a few steps?”

Page 128

Scratha growled but moved back two long steps. “He threw her at me. The littleta-karne threwher at
me.” He touched the ripped stripes on his cheek gingerly. “Damnyou,” he added.
“He hit me,” the woman whimpered, quivering. “Don't let him hit me again.”
“She clawed my face,” Scratha said unsympathetically, glowering.
“He won't hit you again,” Idisio reassured the woman. “I promise. I won't let him.”
“Then she'd best not claw at me again,” Scratha retorted. “Get up, getup , woman! What in the hells are
you doing here? Who are you? Why did Pieas leave you behind?”
“Wian. I'm Wian. I'm Lady Alyea's . . . I was. . . .” The woman shuddered and shook, crying again, and
refused to say anything else.
“I think she's best off resting to calm down,” Idisio said, looking up at Scratha. “And having a healer look
at these cuts. Some of them look infected.”
“Hells,” Scratha said. “All right. Let's get her back to Yuer's.”
The woman looked up sharply, her face turning a stark white. A moment later, her eyes rolled back in
her head and she slumped in a thoroughly unfeigned faint to the dirty stable floor.
Scratha blew out a hard breath, then crouched and gathered the limp form into his arms. He stood with
as little effort as if he'd picked up a sack of feathers. Which might not, Idisio admitted to himself, be far
off; the rips in Wian's dress showed a gaunt form barely above starvation.
“Maybe we shouldn't take her back there,” Idisio objected. “She seemed upset when you said Yuer's
name.”
“All the more reason,” Scratha said. “Time to find out what in the hells is going on here.”

That plan proved fruitless. Seeing the limp girl in Scratha's arms, Yuer summoned servants to take her
away and dismissed his guests with unmistakable finality. Idisio shook Riss awake; muzzy and confused,
she followed them tamely out the door and back to the inn. By the time Idisio finished cleaning himself up
and changed into dry clothes, Riss had recovered enough to know she'd missed something important.
Idisio filled her in while Scratha went to bathe.
“Hewhat? ” she said several times, each one more incredulous and furious than the last. As Idisio
finished the account and Riss drew breath for an obvious tirade, Scratha returned.
“Hedrugged me!” Riss began, just as the desert lord stepped back into the room. “I'm going to—”
“You'll do nothing,” Scratha cut in. He shut the door behind him and regarded her soberly. “You weren't
harmed. Let it go, Riss.”
“How could you have left that girl with him?” she demanded, turning her anger on Scratha. “How could

Page 129

you trust him like that?”
“Yuer always goes with his highest profit,” Scratha said. “From his reaction, he wants the girl alive. He'll
get her back on her feet sooner than any of the village healers could. Hewas a promising ketarch student,
at one time. He knows a lot about medicines
.”
“And drugs,” Riss said bitterly, unappeased.
Scratha shrugged. “I never said he's a nice person, Riss, or trustworthy. But the welfare of a strange girl
Pieas dragged along, probably for his amusement on the road, isn't my concern. At this point, even
finding Pieas isn't all that interesting to me. He's useless. Heran . Whether he went north or south, he's
finished. He'll never be anyone important now. Nobody would touch him as an ally, after such a show of
cowardice. And he's offended Yuer, which is as good as a death sentence in itself. No. Let him go. I've
other business to attend to, more important issues to consider.”
“Like what?” Riss demanded, still scowling. “You can't just leave her behind!”
“Of course I can,” Scratha said sharply. “Ifyou want to stay with her, feel free. I'm sure she'd appreciate
a friendly escort back to Bright Bay. Or take some coin and be on your way alone. The same applies to
you, Idisio,” he added. “I won't need a servant much longer. I'm going back south.”
They stared at Scratha in shared disbelief.
“But . . . you were told . . . you promised,” Idisio stammered idiotically.
“Backsouth ?” Riss said, suspicion and anxiety mingling in her expression.
“I humored the king with this nonsense assignment,” Scratha said. “I wanted to see what he'd do, given
the chance at a desert holding; now I know.” His expression darkened. “He explained in his letter what's
been happening, and I can't believe he's fool enough to think I'd stand for it. He's making a hash of
everything. I'm going home, and taking my lands back, and he can squeal all he wants from Bright Bay.
There's nothing for me past the Horn anymore.”
Riss put a hand over her mouth, eyes wide. “Chance at a desertholding ?” she said, the words almost
inaudible behind her palm. “Theking ?”
“But the king,” Idisio protested.
“Has no true authority over me,” Scratha said. “Desert business comes first.”
“You're adesert lord?” Riss breathed, her face starkly pale. She twisted her hands together. “I beg
pardon, my lord—”
“For what? You're done nothing wrong, Riss.”
“I've argued . . . been disrespectful. . . .”
“You thought me nothing more than some idiot noble on a fool's errand,” Scratha said brusquely. “Let
be. I'm not angry.” He pulled the money pouch from his bags and tossed it on the table. “Split what's left
and go your own ways. I don't need servants in the southlands.”

Page 130

Idisio didn't hesitate. “No. I want to stay with you.”
Scratha frowned at the refusal, then cocked an eyebrow at the latter statement as though surprised.
“Why?”
“Oh, Master, just the other day, you said you couldn't do without me,” Idisio said, deliberately calling to
mind his initial ploy in front of the king. Scratha's mouth twitched; clearly he recognized the reference.
“Mmph,” he said. “I said I'm getting used to having you around. Fine. I'll take you, if you insist. But
Riss—”
“I stay too,” Riss said, rather unexpectedly, and wouldn't look at either of them. “I can't very well go
home again. And traveling alone isn't a good idea for a woman, whatever money you give me. I'd rather
stay with . . . in good company.” She colored a little. “My lord. If you permit.”
Scratha cast a shrewd glance at Idisio and smiled. “Very well. Get some rest, then. It's a long ride to
Sandlaen Port in the morning, and I want to leave early.”

Chapter Twelve
“I told you,” Sela said, “I don't know!”
Alyea sighed. Brief though her aqeyva training had been, she'd learned to read people fairly well; and one
of these two, if not both, knew something they weren't admitting. She'd tried every way she knew to
charm the women into trusting her, but even Gria now regarded her with open hostility.
She stood and crossed to the door, leaning out to speak to the guard. “Send for Micru,” she said, then
withdrew into the room again. “So you're going to torture us?” Sela said, her expression bitter and her
voice shrill with tension. “See the kindness of the southern lady, Gria?”
“Why do you think that?” Alyea asked.
“I've seen that look before,” Sela said, tossing her head. “I know your kind, mylady . Start out kind and
turn to whips when you don't get what you want.” She spat on the floor.
“Gods, you're an idiot,” Alyea said, and turned her back on the woman.
A light tap sounded at the door; Micru slipped into the room, his flat, dark stare taking in the entire room
in one professionally quick sweep. “My lady?”
“Do you know who these women are, Micru?” she asked.
He surveyed them for a long, silent moment, considering. “I knowwhat they are.”
Sela stared at Micru as if beginning to feel fear for the first time. “Slaves,” she said, in an attempt at
scorn. “That's obvious enough.”

Page 131

“Ugrenslaves,” Micru said, and settled into a chair. He studied the women, one knuckle resting against
his mouth. “Northerners. Quasinobles. And fools, beyond a doubt.”
They stared at him warily.
“Fools,” Micru said, his tone eerily, almost hypnotically, flat. “Fools who thought they could buy their
way into a place beyond money.”
“I wasn't interested in going south!” Gria shrilled suddenly. “Shemade me! She's the one after money!”
Sela moved, snake-fast, and slapped her daughter hard.
“Be quiet!” she snarled.
Micru smiled. He crossed to the door; opening it, he told the guards, “Remove the older one. Stay with
her in another room.”
“No!” Sela shrieked, bracing herself in front of her daughter. Alyea forced herself not to react as two
guards wrestled the woman out of the room.
Micru shut the door again.
“Now that your mother isn't here,” he said as he settled back into his chair, “tell us what you know, girl.
It may save both your lives.”
His tone held an offering of hope, not a threat, as though he truly sympathized with the girl and wanted to
help her. Astonished, Alyea watched Gria crumble.
“She's not my mother,” the girl said. Her gaze stayed fixed on a point somewhere past Alyea's left knee.
“Don't hurt her. I'm the one they want.”
The words threw all the possibilities Alyea had considered into chaos. She opened her mouth to speak,
caught Micru's sharp gesture, and stayed silent.
“I've always known I was a foundling,” Gria said, still in that lifeless voice. “It never made any difference.
She always treated me as her own. She couldn't have any of her own, and her husband never produced
any bastards, so I was the best. . . .” She stopped, shut her eyes, and swallowed hard.
“Best chance at an heir?” Micru said.
Gria nodded. “My children will be treated as full blood of my adopted father's line,” she said. “Would
have been.” She raised her left hand, looked at the cuff, let it fall back into her lap.
“Did Sela's husband ever try fathering children on you directly?” Micru said with implacable, emotionless
logic.
Gria shook her head, her expression still blank. “When that . . . that man came, it seemed so good, so
wonderful, that we might gain that status . . . and the s'iopes said it was an honest offer. She's always
trusted the priests. And she . . . talked me into it. Into going south. I didn't want to go, I had someone . . .
but they didn't approve.” Gria opened her eyes, brimming with tears now. “Mama Sela insisted on

Page 132

coming. She knew I'd run away. . . and they promised she'd be sent back with my first male child. The
s'iopes said it was in writing, in the contract, that it was legally enforceable and honest . . . they said it
was truth sworn to under all four gods.” She wiped at her eyes, staring at Alyea appealingly now,
ignoring the man in front of her.
“A southern slave trader would hold no bond under a Northern Church oath,” Micru said. “Past the
Horn, those oaths and those papers don't carry the weight of a grain of sand in the deep desert.”
“We found out,” Gria said bitterly, and wiped at her streaming eyes again.
“Why are you the one they want?” Micru said.
“I don'tknow,” she said. “I really don't. I just know I'm the one they wanted. I heard Ierie talking with his
guards, once, when they thought I was asleep, about killing Mama Sela. They decided I'd be more
pliable if she was around.”
Micru hummed to himself softly, his expression troubled. “When and where were you cuffed?” he said at
last.
“Just outside Water's End. Some men appeared. I never saw them before. They were frightening.” She
shut her eyes. “They drugged us both, but I didn't fall asleep. I don't know why. I wish I had.”
“Frightening,” Micru said patiently. “Why?”
“They looked . . . cruel. Uncivilized. Some had bright blue tattoos.”
Micru sat up straight, his eyes intent now. “Was it here?” He pointed just below his right collarbone.
Gria opened her eyes to look and nodded.
“Did it look like a swirled star?”
She nodded again, mutely, and Micru stood up. “Keep her close, Alyea,” he said. “Keep her very close.
And keep a dagger closer. Stay here. I'll send more guards.”
“Wait,” Alyea said as Micru turned for the door. “What's going on? What does the swirled star mark
mean?”
“Chacerly's made a mistake. A very, very big mistake. Don't trust him any longer.”
“What—”
The door swung shut behind him, cutting off more questions. Moments later, three guards pushed
through, their expressions grim, and took up stations around the room.
“What in the hells is going on?” she demanded. They looked at her briefly and didn't answer.
Alyea stood and walked towards the door; the nearest guard put out a hand in warning, shaking his head.
She sat back down, furious and trying to decide who to pin it on: Micru, for abandoning her without
answers, or Chac, for apparently creating the situation. She had just about settled on being angry at
herself for ever getting into this spot when the door opened again and Chac strode in.

Page 133

He nodded to the guards and crossed to the bed. Alyea rose; he ignored her, looking down at Gria
instead for a long, thoughtful moment.
“I was right,” he said finally, “you should have killed them both. Too late now.”
Alyea pushed between him and the girl.
“You tell me what's going on!” she said, all the frustrated restlessness of the last several hours flaring into
sudden aggression.
He stared at her. For just a moment, his face lit with a rage worthy of a desert lord; then it dissolved into
stoniness again.
“We're leaving,” he said. “It's not safe here for you now.”
“Why not?”
“I don't have time for your stupid questions,” Chac said. He stepped back and signaled to the guards. “If
she doesn't follow me, knock her out and carry her. Bring the other girl as well.”
The old man strode to the door. Two of the guards moved towards Alyea without hesitation; the third,
frowning, said, “Wait . . . this isn't what Micru said—”
Chac turned and flung out a hand, almost too fast to follow; something small and dark whipped through
the air and buried itself in the doubtful man's neck. The guard sagged, clawing at his throat, eyes wide
and astonished. Before Alyea could do more than open her own mouth in surprise, the remaining guards
moved in front of her, blocking her view. She heard gagging noises from behind them, like a man
desperately trying to breathe; then a sour smell in her nose took her into darkness.

Alyea awoke hot and muzzy, with sweat pooled under her back and legs; she groaned and rolled to her
side. Wiping an arm across her face to clear sweat-blurred vision, she propped herself up with her other
elbow and looked around.
She lay in a wide, low-ceilinged carriage, on a low bed with thick cushions. A bench seat nearby held a
neatly folded pile of clothes. Latticed windows took up most of the walls on three sides; the fourth had a
simple latched door.
A tiny, thin, hot breeze wandered through the lattices. Sounds came from outside; people talking, people
walking around. The smell drifting through the air set her stomach rumbling, although she couldn't place
the aroma.
She ached all over, stiff and sore as if she'd been bedridden for days, but she wasn't tied or, as far as
she could tell, hurt. But shewas incredibly hungry. Alyea sat up slowly, looked down at herself, and
addednaked to that list.
“There's a jug with some water by the bed,” a voice said from outside the carriage. “And a cloth, to

Page 134

wipe off the sweat before you get dressed. Clothes on the bench.”
Alyea turned her head, staring through the lattices, feeling suddenly trapped and exposed.
“Don't worry, northern,” the voice went on. “Nobody can see you, and nobody cares anyway. Hurry
up.”
Alyea took a deep breath and reached for the jug.
Cleaning off the worst of the sweat gave her a sense of preparing to face whatever waited outside. The
clothes turned out to be a deep-southern style she'd rarely seen in Bright Bay, and one she'd never
thought to wear herself: a long silk robe, brightly colored and almost transparently thin, with a wide,
braided-silk belt. The front dropped into a deep V; bending over would display everything.
She tried to remember how the women of Water's End had managed to move in these robes without
being immodest, but her attention hadn't been on that at the time. She suspected she would quickly
disgrace herself in this outfit.
“C'mon already, northern,” the voice said.
Alyea shrugged the robe around her shoulders and fastened the inside ties and outer belt. She didn't see
any shoes or slippers; after a moment of looking around helplessly, she went to the door. Half-expecting
it to be locked despite the urging to come out, she rattled at the latch tentatively and jerked back when
someone tugged it open from outside.
“C'mon already,” the voice repeated. “Food's ready.”
She stepped forward cautiously, looking around, and saw a short man with dark skin watching her with
amusement. His long shirt, cut from a rougher cloth than her robe and a sharp white color, draped like
scarecrow clothes against his spare frame; his leggings almost matched the clear blue sky overhead. His
bare feet showed noticeable calluses.
“I don't bite,” he said.
Sand gritted against her feet as she came through the doorway. It shifted and sank underfoot as she
walked a few steps away from the carriage. Questions ran through her mind:Where am I? Who are you?
What's going on?
She stayed silent and studied her surroundings. The carriage had no wheels, only long poles to either
side; she understood why when, looking to one side, she saw four muscular men sitting under a rough
shelter of hide and wood, eating what looked like stew from small wooden bowls. Two more men were
busy dousing the small cookfire and disassembling the charred cooking spit.
Sand lay in all directions; great, rolling swells of it, with only a faint haze of mountains to the west to
break the monotony. No sign of Chacerly, Micru, Halla, Gria, or Sela. More questions, more worry; she
set her teeth lightly in the tip of her tongue to keep from asking. If any of the rules Chac had taught her
applied, she would be in debt for the answer; and right now, she couldn't afford that. Being alive and
unhurt might be a debt all in itself, for all she knew.
“Come,” the man said from behind her. “Eat.”

Page 135

She resisted the pull of her stomach and turned to look at him. His amusement deepened into an actual
grin; she let her stare grow into a glare.
It didn't seem to bother him.
“Eat,” he said again, and made shooing motions with his hands, directing her towards the tent.
Alyea drew a deep breath and walked towards the stew pot. Three small wooden bowls and carved
spoons sat on a small tray, and a large ladle hung from the side of the stew pot. She scooped out a bowl
of stew, trying, as she moved, to watch the men nearby; they showed no interest in her. They ate silently,
staring straight ahead, faces dull and slack.
“Over here,” the small man called. She followed him around the side of the carriage. A thick, coarsely
woven mat had been spread on the sand; another, larger one slanted overhead to shade the area.
Alyea settled down on the mat as gracefully as she could and began to eat. A few mouthfuls into the
stew, the mild spice taste flared suddenly into an eye-watering heat. Alyea had laughed when northerners
choked on food she considered almost bland; now it was her turn to gasp and cough, and her guide's
turn to laugh.
But: “Don't bite into the cactus peppers,” her unidentified guide said without any hint of laughter, glancing
down at her as she sputtered. He unhooked a leather bag from his belt and passed it to her. She stared at
it uncertainly.
“Hah, northern, like this.” He took it back, upended it over his mouth, and squeezed; a cloudy liquid
squirted into his mouth.
She tried it, managing to get most of the liquid into her mouth, and swallowed through almost pure reflex.
The fire of the cactus pepper faded, replaced by a vile sourness; she coughed and almost gagged at the
lingering taste.
“What wasthat ?” she said when she could speak again.
“Perroc-s'etta,” the man said. “Cactus milk. Fermented.”
Alyea drew a careful, deep breath, and set the bowl aside. “I'm done, thanks.”
“Finish eating,” the man said, unsmiling now. “You need it. Just don't bite any of these. . . .” He leaned
down, dipped forefinger and thumb into her bowl, and pulled out a long, white strip Alyea had thought to
be some sort of potato. “Cactus pepper.” He dropped the pepper in his mouth and chewed with a
contented expression.
Alyea shuddered, considered refusing to eat, and decided this man would probably pour it down her
throat if he had to; he had that look to him—friendly, to a point, and business after that. If that had been
the expression on her own face while questioning Gria and Sela, small surprise the women hadn't trusted
her.
Alyea certainly didn't trust this man: not with questions, not with answers should he ask any himself. She
ate the soup quietly and set the bowl on the ground when she finished.
He picked it up and walked away. She stared out at the heat-bleached landscape before her and, on
impulse, went back to her aqeyva lessons.Let thought fade , Ethu had taught her.Let the questions go;

Page 136

fear and anger and worry all become irrelevant.She'd never been very good at it before, but somehow, in
the utter, heat-hazed stillness of the desert, it seemed simple. Soon only her breathing registered, rasping
in and out of her throat. Even the sweat trickling down her face faded from notice.
At last she took a deep breath and opened her eyes. The small man squatted in front of her, an arm's
length away, an odd expression on his face as he watched her.
Calm, centered, and alert now, she picked up on details she'd missed earlier: the pattern at the edge of
his shirt, the calluses on his fingers—and on the edges of his hands. Micru, and some of the other Hidden,
had hands like those. A dark tattoo looped around and around his left forearm in a flowing, twined line.
She'd seen that mark in an old book, one Chac had saved from the Purge and given to Oruen. This man
followed one of the old gods: probably Comos, the god of neutrality.
She met his dark stare without flinching. “Nu-s'e,” she said. “I amsus'a Alyea.”
He nodded slowly. “Ka,” he said. “I'm honored by the gift of your name. I am Juric,taska . Courier,
carrier, guide, and watcher.”
“Ka,” she said. “Thank you for the food and drink.”
He smiled a little and stood, stepping onto the sand without apparent discomfort. Alyea glanced at the
thick callus on his feet and stayed put, then looked up at the sky to check the sun. The endless blue sky
had shifted into blazing streaks of orange and violet; she'd been in aqeyva trance for hours. No wonder
he'd been looking at her like that. She'd never stayed in trance that long before; nobody she knew ever
had.
He smiled at the expression on her face. “The desert tends to take time from you,” he said. “Why are you
here?”
It had the feel of a formal question, almost a riddle game. She considered, watching the tiny shifts in his
face as he returned her gaze; she thought about the tattoo on his forearm and what it implied, and finally
said, “Am I here?”
“I am here,” Juric said. “You are here. Why?”
She drew a deep breath, let it out very slowly, and gambled. “Ask the wind.”
A moment of silence hung, while he stared at her; then he smiled again, but it held a dangerous edge this
time. “You do not follow Comos.”
“I've never been called, no.”
“Alyea,” he said, abruptly dropping out of the formal tones, “doyou know why you're here?”
She stopped herself before she could say:because I'm an idiot , and swallowed.
“No,” she said. “I don't. I'm ignorant.”
“Ignorant,” he said, “not stupid.”
She stared at him. Had he heard her unspoken words?

Page 137

He smiled. “I also trained in aqeyva, Alyea. For much longer than you have.”
Alyea tried to smooth her expression to the blandness Juric had shown a few moments ago.
“Not bad,” he said, grinning. “Keep practicing.”
She set her teeth in her tongue to stop the questions she dearly wanted to ask.
He nodded, as if pleased at her continuing silence, and motioned her up and off the mat. She found, to
her surprise, that the sand felt warm, but hardly as scorching as she'd expected. Juric lifted the two mats,
then rolled them up into one thick bundle with quick, professional movements; his gaze swept the sky and
surrounding sands, darting back to his work now and again.
The rolled mats held in one hand, he gestured to the carriage.
“Get in,” he said.
She obeyed without protest, noting in passing that the men had broken down their tent, bundled the poles
and fabric into a neat cylinder, and kicked sand over the remnants of the small fire, obscuring it
completely. Under the steady evening breeze beginning to flow across the sand, all traces of their passing
would be gone within hours.
She shivered, feeling vulnerable and frightened again, and sat on the low bed. After a few moments, Juric
followed her in, shut the door behind him, and after tucking the rolled mats under the bench seat, settled
on the bench almost across from her. The small space suddenly seemed much smaller, and his dark stare
less friendly.
Juric rapped his knuckles on the wall by his head, and the carriage lurched as the men lifted it. The
carriage swayed; a low chanting came from outside, cadence time in a foreign tongue. They moved
forward, carried on the shoulders of six strong men.
“Machago,” she said in a low voice, glaring at Juric. “You're a slavemaster.”
He shook his head. “Taska. Courier. Carrier. Errand-boy. I'm not their master.”
“They're slaves.”
“Of course,” he said. “But not bound slaves. They're working off crimes and debts. Once they work off
their due, they'll be free with no stigma.”
“Crimes,” she repeated, careful to keep it flat and non-questioning. He smiled, showing even, white teeth.
“We don't have time for the formal games, right now; you'll incur no debt by asking open questions.
Except,” he added, holding up a hand as if she'd jumped to speak, although she'd made no move. “I tell
you when you can ask questions, and you have to answer my questions honestly.”
She considered, looking for traps, and finally nodded. “Accepted.”
“Ask,” he said. “Two questions.”
She drew breath, chose carefully from the myriad of worries, and said, “Where is Gria?”
His eyebrows rose, as if he'd expected a different question. “Your ugren slave?” he said. “With thehask

Page 138

.”
She debated asking whathask meant, but she suspected he meant Chacerly, and she had a more
important question in mind.
“Why is Gria so important?” she said instead.
His smile faded. He studied her for a few breaths, that odd look on his face again, and finally said, “The
hask underestimated you badly. You're better off with me. I ask you in return: what do you know of
desert Family bloodlines?”
“Everyone's related,” she said before she could stop herself, and bit her tongue.
His amused look returned.
“True,” he admitted. “Another question: have you heard of the blood trial?”
“I've heard the words,” she said, “but I don't know what they mean.”
“To become a full desert lord, men must go through the blood trials,” Juric said. “Each man's trials are
different, but all must be tested by Callen followers of Comos, of Ishrai, and of Datda, the old gods of
the desert. All three Callen must be unanimous in their agreement that the supplicant is worthy to become
a desert lord. Not all who apply are accepted to go through the trials, and not all who are accepted
survive.”
She waited. He nodded, approving, and went on:
“Different families have different rules on who is allowed to become a desert lord. Sessin will only allow
their full-blooded children to attempt the blood trials. Scratha has always been less . . . particular, but
perhaps that is because their matrilineal reckoning ensures the blood will stay in their family in the end.”
He bent and slid open a thin drawer from under the bed. Lifting out a thick tan shawl, he handed it to her
and closed the drawer. She draped the wrap around her, only now aware that the temperature had
begun to drop rapidly. The sand-colored shawl felt thick and warm; she hugged it tight and said, “Thank
you.”
“The Callen take whatever applicants come to them,” he said, ignoring her gratitude. “Once in a while, a
supplicant comes who has not been sent by a Family. This is exceptionally rare, but it has happened
before. Cafad Scratha was one such exceptional person; his entire Family was slaughtered while he was
out on a desert vigil. Nobody remained to back his application, and the other Families, for whatever
reason, would not put their names behind his. He opted to take the trials without a sponsoring Family. It
was the only way he could become Lord of Scratha Family and remain in possession of his lands.”
His voice came from a gathering shadow as the light faded. Alyea shivered again, tucking the shawl
closer around her body. She thought about asking if they could light a candle or hand-lantern, but the
dark didn't seem to bother Juric, and the carriers apparently could see well enough.
“Understand, Scratha Family has always been highly respected as scholars and diplomats,” Juric's voice
went on. “They studied old writings and were always able to smooth over political difficulties. A gathering
was considered lacking if a Scratha lord did not attend. They brought families to a peace-table that had
glared at each other over drawn daggers for hundreds of years. Their highest achievement was something

Page 139

nobody believed possible: the arranged marriage of Cida Scratha to Lord Evkit of the teyanain.”
“The what!” she said before she could stop herself. “I never heard of that!”And why would I? she
thought, annoyed with herself.I didn't even know the teyanain existed before traveling south. I'm starting
to act as though I grew up here; how ridiculous!
“It never happened,” Juric said. She couldn't tell in the darkness whether he sounded sad or amused.
Too much depended on the speaker's face.
It occurred to her that he couldn't see her, either. That relaxed her nerves considerably.
“Cida was willful and stubborn,” Juric said. “She ran off with a commoner the night after the
announcement of her engagement to Lord Evkit. She destroyed literally years of negotiations and
agreements. Her desertion was a mortal insult to Lord Evkit.”
Alyea sat very still, staring at the faint silhouette of Juric's head.
“The teyanain are very bad people to insult,” Juric said. “Scratha Family found themselves no longer
welcome at any of the other Family gatherings. Their allies fell away, leaving Scratha Family open and
vulnerable. Scratha guards deserted with no warning. Their food animals fell ill with strange diseases; their
wells clogged unexpectedly. One by one, the lords of Scratha abandoned them or died; one changed his
allegiance to Darden Family. Another, according to rumor, went south, possibly hoping to find help from
the Forbidden Jungles. He was never seen again.”
“They just ran away?” Alyea said, incredulous.
“Desert lords, like all people, have their personalities and quirks and fears,” Juric said. “And it's a rare
human that won't at least consider jumping from a rapidly sinking ship, especially when there's a sound
and ready vessel at hand to step onto.”
“But if they hadn't left. . . .”
“If this, if that,” Juric said. “I'm telling you what happened. I'm not saying the lords of Scratha acted very
admirably during that time. Do you want to hear the rest?”
“Yes,” Alyea said, putting aside her anger with an effort. “Please, go on.”
“One after another, the desert lords of Scratha left or died,” Juric said. “The wells dried up. The people
began to starve. And nobody would send aid. Not a single family. Not even the Aerthraim. It was said
the line of Scratha was cursed.”
The carriage rocked and swayed, the hoarse breathing and soft chanting of the men carrying it the only
sound.
“And then,” Juric said, “Cafad Scratha went out on his first walkabout, as part of his training to become a
desert lord. He returned to find every single member of his family dead and the floors covered in their
blood.”
“I'm surprised he survived this long,” she said, then covered her mouth, appalled at her heartless
comment.

Page 140

Juric didn't seem to mind.
“Scratha is matrilineal,” he reminded her. “Cafad is male. In the long term, he's meaningless. He'll never
have the authority a woman could gain, no matter how many children he has. He's gone through the
blood trials, and he's Lord of Scratha, but it's a house without walls. Nobody's ever challenged his status:
why bother? Desert Family guilt gave him everything he has. Of course, nobody's ever found Cida
Scratha, either; she's been presumed dead for years.”
Breath caught in her throat as the implications connected in her head.
“Oh, gods,” she said, horrified. “Gria's the heir toScratha?”
“Your slave is a foundling,” Juric said, “raised by a northern lordling. She would need a full Scratha lord
to speak for her bloodline before that notion could even be hinted at publicly.”
“A foundling the teyanain wanted badly enough to put an ugren cuff on,” she said.
“Questioning the ways of the teyanain,” Juric said, “is a shortcut to a cursed life.”
She let out a long breath and thought about it. “I've been blundering about like a horse in a glass shop,”
she said.
“True.”
Alyea shook her head, wishing she could read his face, but it remained invisible in the darkness. “Chac
should have told me all this,” she said. “Long since, I should have known what you just told me. I would
have handled things differently. Why didn't he tell me?”
Juric made no reply. She heard him shift, and scraping sounds; a moment later, a small lantern flared. He
quickly hooded it to allow only a faint leakage of light, then hung it on a long-shafted hook. Alyea
watched it sway for a moment, almost hypnotized by the motion, then tore her gaze away and looked
back at Juric.
“To be a desert lord, you have to go through the blood trials,” Juric said. “Quiet. Don't speak. Listen to
me. Only the blood trials will give you the authority you need in this situation. The king's word isn't good
enough here, and your advisors knew that.
“Thehask arranged for you to go through the trials, but it's a farce. He doesn't think you can do it. He
intends you to fail. I believe you can succeed.”
He waited, his shadowed stare fixed intently on her face.
Alyea stared back, frozen, unable to believe what he had just said. She had to takethree potentially fatal
trials just to serve as king's proxy at Scratha Fortress? Madness.
Another piece turned over and connected: a full desert lord had to verify Gria's bloodline. None of the
other Families, from the sound of it, would offer such a concession, and Scratha had been banished to
the Stone Islands; calling him back could take months.
Furthermore, Juric's words implied that if Alyea survived the blood trials, she'd be granted more authority
on the basis of her gender than Cafad had ever held. The logic of that escaped her, but this wasn't the
time to argue southern customs.

Page 141

Alyea could name Gria heir to Scratha and annul her slavery.Ifshe survived the blood trials.
“How long do I have to decide?” she said, barely above a whisper.
“Thehask bid me bring you to him for your first trial,” he said. “But I am a Callen of Comos, follower of
the winds. I answer to myself alone, and my trial is always the first to be given. At your request, I can
begin your trials. But once begun, you must continue; you cannot change your mind halfway through.”
She shut her eyes, feeling ill. Events had spun too far from anything she'd expected. Every time she
thought she understood, something else knocked her off balance. Juric had said he thought she could do
it; did that mean he favored her, or was that a simple assessment without bias either way?
“I'll do it,” she said at last. “With you to start the trials. Let's get this over with.”
He lifted a hand and rapped sharply on the side of the carriage. “Then we begin now.”

Chapter Thirteen
Idisio discovered two things over the next several days. The first, and most obvious, was that he hated
sea travel. He hated the constant motion, he hated the enclosed spaces, he hated the fact that he couldn't
leave if he wanted to. He hated that if something happened and the monstrous thing sank, he'd be dead
because he'd never learned to swim.
He didn't get seasick, but he couldn't sleep and his appetite vanished. He couldn't decide what felt
worse: sitting in the tiny cabin they'd been given and staring at swaying walls or sitting out on deck
watching the swaying waves. Shortly after they boarded, Scratha handed him a thin sheaf of blank
parchment, a pen and inkwell, and a bound book of children's stories to practice his still-uncertain skills;
but the idea of trying to concentrate soon held little appeal.
He couldn't even vary the monotony by visiting the horses. They'd been left in Sandsplit Village as a
“gift” for Yuer. Idisio suspected more politics he didn't understand had been involved in that gesture.
The second thing he realized was that he missed Riss's company. She'd been very quiet since that first
night at the inn. She could be found out on deck in all sorts of weather, just walking or standing by the
rail, staring out at the waves Idisio hated so much. She hadn't given Idisio more than a distracted wave
and a half-hearted smile since they boarded.
And Scratha didn't seem inclined to talk either. He spent most of his time brooding: standing at the rail
himself, staring south and west. His replies to comments or questions remained curt and mostly
uninformative; Idisio gave up trying within a day of leaving Sandlaen port.
The sailors, on the other hand, talked. In fact, Idisio sometimes thought they never shut up. One in
particular, a brawny man with developing streaks of grey in his bright red hair and a thick coating of
freckles everywhere else, seemed to always be singing, talking, or laughing. Seasongs, old ribald desert

Page 142

tunes, northern hymns, slave work-songs: the man seemed to know every tune ever penned in the
kingdom. The second day out, he sang a verse that made Idisio sit up and stare, unable to believe the
man's gall:
There was a king, a lovely king
Who loved a lady fair
He didn't hold her to himself
But let her spread her wares.
He grinned at Idisio's shocked stare, and went on to the second verse:
And in the town they said of him
The rot had caught his brain
The lady fair, that spread her wares,
Should not be seen again.
“A little off-key, I think,” the man said, and ambled over to where Idisio sat openmouthed. “At least, by
your face.”
“I can't believe you're singing that,” Idisio said.
“What, 'The Lay of Dusty Rose'? You've never heard it before?”
“I've heard of it,” Idisio said carefully. “But it's banned, with an execution order on anyone who sings it.”
“Oh, if I only sang allowed songs,” the man said, “I'd have nothing fun to sing about.” He turned away
and went back to his work, lifting his voice in another verse, one Idisio hadn't heard before:
The lady she stayed by her king
(And by all the town as well!)
And when the time came for her end
They rang the great king's bell.
The king he went quite mad with grief
And screamed out like the crows
For ten days full he mourned his whore
Whose name was Dusty Rose.
“Gods,” Idisio said under his breath. He understood now why the singers he'd heard had never made it
past the second verse before being firmly evicted from the area.
The next four verses became increasingly explicit as they told the story of the sorrowing king's decision
to take his lady's name for his own, and his death, shortly after that, from the “rot” that had killed the
original Dusty Rose.
Upon finishing, the sailor turned and bowed in all directions. The others roundly ignored him, although
one or two grinned.
“Ah, talent is never appreciated,” he said, coming to stand beside Idisio. “Red.”
“Sorry?” Idisio said, startled.

Page 143

“Red,” the man repeated. “My nickname. Red. Kinda hard to forget.” He raked a hand through his hair.
“Oh,” Idisio said. “I'm. . . .” Not for the first time, he wished he had a nickname like that. The only tag
he'd carried on the streets had been “Lifty”: not a name to introduce oneself to honest people by.
“Idisio,” he finished.
“It's true, y'know,” the man said unexpectedly.
“Sorry?”
“The song. Dressed up a bit, but true at the core. That's why it's banned.”
Idisio had grown up hearing the gossip and back-door history of Bright Bay, butthat notion had never
crossed his ears before. “Really?”
“Really,” Red said with a straight, earnest face, then laughed again. “Don't take it all so serious, Idisio.
You worry yourself into an early grave that way.”
He clapped the boy on the shoulder and sauntered away, whistling. Within a few steps, he'd broken into
another song:
There is a lake, a ghosty lake
Far to the north it lies
And they say should a woman draw near
She gets a big surprise. . . .
The words faded, drowned out by the creaks and pops of a ship under full sail.
“He's mad,” a voice said from behind Idisio.
Turning, Idisio saw another sailor looking at him from a few feet away.
“Don't pay him no mind. The more attention he gets, the worse he is. You're just a new audience for his
nonsense.”
“I figured,” Idisio said, feeling vaguely disappointed for some reason. “But. . . .”
“What?”
“Well . . . is it true? That song?”
The sailor sighed. “That's the bitch of it. He's at his craziest when he's telling truth.

Red turned out to be the best part of what became too long a voyage. Scratha stayed moody. Riss
continued to ignore him. The other sailors, talkative as chatterbirds with each other, gave Idisio only the
briefest of noncommittal nods as they went by. Only Red displayed openly friendly behavior. Idisio
couldn't decide whether to take the man seriously or not, but he was always entertaining. When the sailor

Page 144

worked on deck, Idisio usually tried to find a spot nearby.
Red only repeated the song about the “ghosty lake” once. It told of a lake to the north of the Great
Forest, populated by strange creatures that seduced innocent women and stole any children that came
from the union:
And the king he heard of this
By his pious advisor's word
“Evil” they named the lake
But truer to so name the priest's heart. . . .
It wasn't a funny song; it didn't have a regular rhythm or rhyme, and it cut closer to the bone than the one
about Dusty Rose. The song painted the king as overshadowed by his Northern Church advisors, and a
helpless plaything of their malice; Idisio, suspecting the song referred to either Ninnic or Mezarak, had his
doubts on that view.
Red didn't bow for applause afterwards, and Idisio decided against asking for the truth of that song; he
didn't want the answer. He stopped following Red around, afraid of hearing more songs like that. He
chose instead to spend his time on deck standing at one of the rails, staring out at the passing view.
To the east, the Kingsea seemed to stretch in an endless sheet of frothed blue and green; to the west
rose the Horn. Red sometimes paused beside Idisio, dropping a casual remark or two before moving on
again.
“That bump up there,” he said once, pointing over the starboard rail, “that's a fair-size way-stop. I been
through there. Strange people; they've been digging the dirt out from around their houses so long, most of
'em look like they're up on little pillars.”
“Why would they do that?” Idisio asked, mystified.
“To build more houses,” Red told him, and wandered away again. Idisio squinted up at the distant ridge
Red had pointed to, thought about it, and decided the man had been pulling his leg. Nobody could be
that foolish.
But in a rare moment of conversation with Scratha, his master confirmed the sailor's story.
“Brickroot grows thickest up there,” Scratha explained. “It's a profitable business and the main Horn
industry. Most buildings in the outer desert areas are made of some form of brickroot blocks. I know the
waystop he mentioned; they've carved their existing soil down to the underlying rock in places. Stupid,
really; there's no replacing the dirt they're selling. They'll have to look for another means of income soon.”
Something about that thought prompted Scratha into another brooding fit, and Idisio slunk away without
his absence being noticed. Another time, Idisio stood watching a ship passing to port, some distance
away, when Red stopped beside him. The sailor squinted and said, “Merchanter. Look, Idisio: see that
flag? Pay attention to those colors. That's out of Stass; one of merchant Deiq's ships, carrying sweets and
fruit. Man makes a living on it. You ever trysuka ?”
“Once or twice,” Idisio said. His mouth watered at the recollection. “What did you have? A stick or a
chew?”
“A stick,” Idisio said. The soft candies had been more expensive, and so harder to steal; he'd never tried,
more concerned with survival than sweets.

Page 145

Red rummaged in a worn belt pouch and handed Idisio a small, soft candy wrapped in brightly colored
paper. “Here. Try one of these.” It tasted even better than Idisio remembered. The soft taffy clung to his
teeth, giving him a moment's worry that he'd be scraping it off with a splinter, and then abruptly dissolved
into nothing more than a lingering sweetness and a marvelous memory. He rolled his eyes and sighed
blissfully. Red grinned and nodded.
“Thank you,” Idisio said fervently when the last scrap of taffy had melted away. “That was wonderful.”
“Wish I had more for you,” Red said, “but I got to save a few for my boy.”
“You have a son?” Idisio said, and tried to think of the usual thing to say next. “Um, how old is he?”
“I'm not sure,” Red said. He turned to stare south with an expression not unlike Scratha's brooding look.
“I just found out about him. Maybe ten, maybe fifteen by now. I don't know. I lost track of the years,
somewhere along the way.”
“Um,” Idisio said, at a loss again.
“Don't even know for sure he's mine,” Red said, still staring into the distance. “But he's got red hair, and
that's not so common in the southlands. Well.” He shook himself, gave Idisio a distracted smile, and
moved away.
They passed by the port of Stass that night. Idisio was disappointed when Scratha told him, the next
morning, that he had slept through it; he'd been hoping to stretch his legs on land. Scratha had insisted
that they all stay below during the stop in Bright Bay, to avoid being seen–a sensible precaution, and
Idisio hadn't argued. But he'd been looking forward to seeing Stass Port, and said as much aloud.
“You didn't need to wake up,” Scratha said. “I paid the captain extra to provision heavily in Bright Bay
so we wouldn't lose time stopping there. We're headed for Agyaer.”
Idisio still didn't understand his master's driving urgency, unless it was to get off this wobbling monstrosity
called a ship. But Scratha still wasn't talking; every hour they traveled further south, the more he drew
into his proud, isolated lordly shell. Idisio, seeing the flickering of madness in the man's eyes almost
constantly now, prudently withdrew and avoided him as much as possible.
Riss took to staying in her cabin, coming up less and less frequently for air. Even Red became curt on
occasion, although he always apologized immediately and profusely, and went out of his way to make
Idisio laugh again. The other sailors went on ignoring everything, doing their work, gathering in clusters to
rest, and dispersing to work again.
Idisio busied himself with reading, writing, and practicing aqeyva meditations. The meditation provided
the most relief; he found it possible, even easy, to slip into a trance for hours. Any long stretch of time
when he wasn't aware of the ceaseless swaying around him was perfect as far as he was concerned, and
soon he spent more time in trance than out of it.
Even so, the voyage stretched out too long and too lonely. Idisio let out a long breath of deep relief at the
cry of “Agyaer!”
The port city sprawled along the coast for miles before the docks came into view. An imposing slope of
rock dwarfed the city, which spread mostly across the broken and erratic skirts of that wall. Caravans,
mules and people could be seen trudging up a wide stair cut into the cliff. Looking at that steep path,

Page 146

Idisio had a bad feeling that they'd be climbing it themselves soon.
Closer to the ship, tiny coast-hopper boats rowed busily back and forth along the shoreline, laden with
everything from huge baskets of fruit to bolts of fine cloth. The sounds of singing and laughter drifted
across the water, punctuated with drum beats, rhythmic and arrhythmic all at once. Idisio stood at the
starboard rail, entranced.
“Welcome to Agyaer,” Red said, leaning on the rail beside him. His eyes were bright, his expression
expectant as a child about to open a gift. “See that, over there? That blue roof? That's where Yhaine
lives. I'd almost forgotten about her. Years ago and more than one bottle, as the saying goes. I'll be
seeing her soon enough, and my son.” He shook his head, eyes fixed on the distant, barely visible roof
until it was lost to sight.
“How did you find out?” Idisio ventured, not sure what to say. “About your son, I mean?”
“Ran into an old friend of mine, one I hadn't seen in years,” Red said, craning as if in one last attempt to
see the roof. “I've been working Stone Island and Kismo ships out in the Goldensea; more profit to be
had, more exciting. But excitement gets old, and so have I. This side of the Horn has nice, easy work,
long as you stay on coast runners like this one. I wouldn't go on one that tacks out over the open water
of the Kingsea, not me. What was your question?” He looked back to Idisio, his bright blue eyes
puzzled. “I'm sorry. I've been losing track of things lately. Can't seem to stop thinking about Yhaine.”
“You answered it,” Idisio said, trying to smile.
“Oh, good.” Red smiled vaguely, then his expression sharpened. “Idisio—would you . . . d'you think you
could go with me?”
“Ah. . . .” Idisio blinked, taken aback. “Go where?”
“To see Yhaine,” Red said as if it should have been obvious. “I don't know, I just . . . I haven't seen her
in so long.” He turned and looked back at the passing town, brooding again. “You don't have to come to
the door with me, just . . . just walk me there. I'm afraid I won't make it all the way to her door if I go
alone.”
“What do you think will happen to you on the way?” Idisio said, utterly confused. What good could a
scrawny boy do against something that could overpower a large man like Red?
“I'm afraid I'll bolt,” Red said starkly, his hands tight on the rail and his gaze straight ahead. “I'm scared,
Idisio. You'll remind me of what I'm going for. Just you being there will remind me.”
Idisio opened his mouth, shut it again, and swallowed. He wasn't sure if he'd just been handed a
compliment or called a child.
“I don't know if I can,” he said. “My master's in a hurry for some reason.”
“I'll have a word with him,” Red said with sudden determination, and turned on his heel, almost sprinting
away before Idisio could say a word to hold him back.
“Oh,no ,” Idisio said, and ran after him.

Page 147

The desert lord's stare seemed to bore into the sailor; Red endured the examination with stubborn
determination.
“You're telling the truth,” Scratha said finally. It wasn't a question.
“Yes, my lord,” Red said, voice shaky. “I wouldn't dare lie to a desert lord, my lord.”
“Don't let him get hurt,” Scratha said.
“No, my lord. I won't, my lord.”
Scratha glanced to Idisio. “Do you want to go with him?”
Idisio opened his mouth, not sure how to reply, and was astonished by the strong “Yes, my lord!” that
emerged.
Scratha stared at Idisio for a long, narrow-eyed moment, then nodded. “I have arrangements to make
anyway. It'll take time, and we'll have to lodge here tonight. I'll be taking two rooms at the Silver Sands
Inn; come back there when you're done.”
He even gave Idisio a half-round of gold to spend as he liked.
“Wages,” Scratha said in response to Idisio's incredulous stare, “and rather overdue.”
Idisio barely had time to stammer thanks before Red grabbed him by the arm and hustled him off the
boat.
“Good man, your master,” Red said. He seemed hardly aware of what he was saying. “Lord, I mean.
Desert lord. Sorry about that.”
He switched abruptly into an explanation of how the houses they passed had been built, then rattled on
feverishly for several blocks, seizing topics apparently at random. At last, he fell silent, released Idisio's
arm and slowed to a more casual walk. His eyes looked a bit wild and his breath came in unsteady gulps;
after a few more steps he stopped.
“I can't do it, Idisio. I can't. It's been too long. He's got to be at least ten by now. Older. Maybe even
fifteen. I've never been good with time. Gods, I can't do this. They won't thank me for interfering now.
I'm mad to be thinking of doing this.”
He turned on his heel as if to retreat; Idisio grabbed him by the arm and said, without thinking, “Red, I'd
love my father to come find me!”
Red froze, staring down at Idisio. “You never knew your father?”
“No,” Idisio said. “I grew up on the streets of Bright Bay as an orphan.” He looked away from Red's
horrified gaze, feeling intensely embarrassed at the admission. He hadn't intended to say it; hadn't even
known he felt that way. He'd meant to say something encouraging to bolster the man's resolve, not
expose an old hurt he'd thought long ago healed over.

Page 148

“Oh, gods, Idisio, I'm sorry,” Red said. “I had no idea. I wouldn't have asked . . . you must think me
completely heartless.”
“No,” Idisio said, trying to smile. “I think you're great. Just don't run away. That's why you brought me,
right? To keep you from running away?”
Red stared at him for another moment, then nodded sharply and turned back around. “Let's go,” he said,
and strode forward.

Chapter Fourteen
The slaves settled in a silent circle, their attention fixed on the ground in front of them. Juric guided Alyea
to the opposite side of the carrier, away from their view. He spread the mat on the ground and motioned
her to stand on it.
“Take off your clothes, and sit,” he said, stepping back several paces. He sank to the ground himself, sat
cross-legged, and stared at her with a challenging gaze clear even under the faint light from stars and
waning moon.
She drew a shivering breath, uncertain. Would she fail the trial if she refused? Or would obeying be a
failure? Was the test to see if she blindly obeyed a strong voice or used her wits to choose her own path?
Would Juric kill her the moment she failed? She had a feeling she'd never see the death blow coming.
So much rested on her sketchy memories of what the deep south believed; she wished she'd spent more
time reading with Oruen about that. It had never interested her very much. What had that old book said?
Comos represented neutrality. The god of the winds, the god of balance, everyone stood transparent
before him . . . and transparent could be translated, loosely, as 'naked.'
She stripped off the loose robe and sat, fervently hoping she'd remembered it right. A light breeze
feathered against her skin, chilling her instantly; she shivered and hoped even more strongly this wouldn't
take long.
“You called on Comos earlier without knowledge,” Juric said. “I forgive the ignorance. You did not
know me as Callen. Never call on a god blindly. They will answer, and mortals often regret their reply;
and the followers of a god can be less gracious yet.”
She bowed her head, not sure what to say.
“If you had to choose between your two ugren slaves,” Juric said, “which would you give life, and which
sentence to die?”
Alyea knew this game. She'd heard Chac drill Oruen with questions like this, day after day.
She slowed her breathing and focused, centering herself to speak from the calmest, most objective place
possible. That had been Chac's first lesson: politics demand that you decide from the mind, not the heart,

Page 149

and that mind must be perfectly still. But did Juric look for the same answer Chac would have wanted?
“Gria to live,” she said at last.
“Why?”
“The death of Sela would cause lesser ripples,” Alyea said, choosing her words with care.
“How do you know?”
Another question Chac had made Oruen answer countless times.
“I only know what I see,” she said. “What I see tells me Gria has more power to change the world
around her than Sela.”
“Is that a reason for Gria to live, or to die?”
Alyea hesitated. Chac had never asked that question.
“To live,” she said at last.
“Because she has power? You would kill those without power, then?”
Although Juric's voice remained completely emotionless, Alyea had a bad feeling in the pit of her stomach
now. He'd maneuvered her into a trap, and she didn't know the way out.
“That isn't what I meant,” she said at last.
“When you follow the words of another instead of your own wisdom,” Juric said, “you often speak other
than you mean. Try again, Alyea, without the crutch of thehask's teachings this time. I will give you a
second chance, which others would not. Which of your slaves would you sentence to die, ifyou had to
choose?”
What she said next surprised her. Words bubbled up as if freed from a long-sealed vault: “I would ask
them to choose. It's their lives, not mine; why should I decide their fate?”
A long silence hung between them.
“Always use your own wisdom,” Juric said at last. “If you die from it, at least you die with honesty in
your mouth. If I asked you to mark for death one of the slaves that carried us here, what would be your
answer?”
“It would depend on the reason for the death.”
“Why?”
“If it was a madman's whim, with no just cause, I would refuse,” she said. “I would protect the slaves as
best I could. If the reason was good, I would ask first for the slaves to choose, and pick only if I had to,
and as blindly as I could.”
“You lived under a madman who took your slaves from you. Is this how you acted then?”

Page 150

She licked suddenly dry lips and sat very still. How had he known that? A chill ran down her spine. “No.
I was afraid.”
“Is fear a reason to allow another to die that you may live?”
Tears dripped from her chin onto her bare chest; the moisture slid slowly around the curve of her breasts,
leaving a damp trail that chilled her further.
“No,” she said. “It's not a good reason.”
“Reason,” Juric said, “is not good. It is not bad. It is what it is. Fear is a reason, anger is a reason, love is
a reason. Good or bad does not attach. That is the way of Comos, to see the truth of what is. Aqeyva
comes from Comos, and it is a powerful tool. Masters of aqeyva can hear the wind, which circles the
world and knows everything that has ever happened and will ever be. With that understanding, it is
impossible to judge right or wrong, good or bad.”
Alyea listened, frowning at the dimly lit figure in front of her. “Even Ninnic? Even Mezarak and Pieas?”
“What you see as a monster,” Juric said, “is the least part of a man. The slaves that carry you are named
comisti ; they have been convicted of crimes ranging from theft to rape. They appealed to Comos, and
were granted the following terms: they are sworn to silence. They will not look at nor speak to anyone
but their master. They will be worked hard and relentlessly for all the days of their sentence. At the end
of their service, some comisti find themselves called to the service of a god; others go on about their lives.
But whatever their choice, their debt is paid, their crimes forgotten as if they never happened. The only
sign they bear of their service is a small, easily hidden brand. That is the justice of Comos.”
“And if they repeat the crime, or commit another?” Alyea asked.
“If a comisti appeals a second time to Comos, they receive the same terms as before, with one
difference: this time, when their service is up, they will be granted an honorable death. There will be no
dishonor to their family or bloodline.”
Juric held up a hand to stop Alyea as she began to speak again. “Enough questions. I have another for
you; if the choice was between the two of us, that one must die, what would your answer be?”
The words remained as emotionless as before, but the hair rose on the back of her neck. She thought
back over everything that had been said. Her breathing steadied and slowed as she considered, and she
found herself slipping into a light trance. She allowed it, deciding it couldn't hurt to have more clarity of
mind. As her pulse settled, she found herself on a mental high ledge of sorts, looking down at the question
from a distance.
Did she deserve to live? What had she done that made her life of value?
Her faults, her mistakes, from childhood on, paraded in stately logic before her. She'd failed, not once,
but many times; she hadn't protected her servants, hadn't listened to the people around her, hadn't lived
her values at all. She'd believed herself special, all her life, better than a commoner because of her blood;
later, she'd thought herself better than the court because she'd been seduced by a man who later became
king.
Not easy to look at, even from a distance. She could feel tears rolling down her face and dripping onto

Page 151

her chest again, steady as her pulse. Many of the thoughts that appeared she'd never consciously been
aware of before; but she could see now that her life had been filled with selfish, fear-driven motives.
She turned her attention to what shehad done well, and another series of past decisions unrolled in front
of her. She'd tried, to the best of her abilities and knowledge, to do right; and how could sacrificing her
life help anyone? Ignorance and arrogance had influenced her life, but not ruled it; bright spots offset the
painful memories. She'd found the courage to dismiss all her servants rather than risk losing any more to
royal mishandling. She'd stepped in front of Chacerly to save a pair of obscure northern women. She'd
had many discussions with Oruen, before and after he took the throne, about the standard beliefs about
women and what she wished could change. Some of the changes he'd started had come from their long
talks.
She'd done poorly, and she'd done well.
And Juric likely felt the same way about his life. Did he have more or less worth than she did? Should he
die for her to live? Should she die so that he could live? The breeze stirred her hair, drew her attention
away from her thoughts, pulled her into feeling every shift and whisper against her skin.
She opened her eyes, the answer clear in her mind at last, and found Juric watching her, his head cocked
slightly to one side.
“I do not have the wisdom to choose between our lives,” she said steadily, “and would ask the wind to
decide.”
He stood, motioning her to rise; she obeyed, stood unafraid and naked in front of him, waiting for his
decision.
“The test of Comos is the test of the self,” Juric said. “It is a test of the ego, to see if you can set your
own wants aside for the larger good. You cannot be a desert lord if you put your own fears before the
good of those you rule and protect. You cannot be a leader if you listen only to yourself. You must
recognize when you are too close to make a decision, and allow another to step in. The desert is harsh,
and life is not fair; a cowardly or arrogant leader would cause many deaths. That is why a full desert lord
must have the approval of Comos.”
He paused. She trusted her instincts and stayed quiet.
“You pass the test,” he said at last. “You may bear the mark of Comos. Come here.” As she
approached, he drew a small glass box from a pouch at his waist. “Turn. Hold still.”
He smeared a cold paste on her mid-back, in a precise pattern no larger than the palm of her hand. A
breath later, the cold turned to fire, and she screamed without intending to, dropping to her knees. His
hands locked around her wrists, and she realized she'd been trying to claw at her back to get the stuff off.
“Quiet,” he said in her ear.
She gasped and forced herself to a muted whimpering, and finally to silence, but couldn't stop the tears or
the trembling. Dimly, she sensed that Juric had released her hands; she bent forward, crouched like an
animal on the ground, and tried to breathe through the scorching agony. Her breath came out in
uncontrollable hoarse gasps.
Seconds or minutes or hours later, she felt pressure and a coolness as Juric smeared another, thicker

Page 152

paste over the first. The fire cooled, as if doused by ice water, and abruptly the trembling shifted to
shivering. Her muscles began to loosen from their pain-locked tension; then the stars went out and
darkness graciously took away sensation.

Alyea woke to darkness and the feel of a thick dressing on her midback. She'd been laid on her
stomach. She lay quietly for a while, examining her memories; she must have fainted from the exhaustion
of enduring that much pain. She'd seen people do that before, and they generally woke stiff and cramped,
almost unable to move.
She stayed still, blinking, letting the sway of the carriage soothe her frayed nerves. She could feel Juric
nearby, hear his breathing. If he had the aqeyva training he claimed, he knew she'd woken, but he said
nothing. Letting her think, maybe, or waiting to see what she would do now, or possibly in trance himself.
From the even serenity of his breathing, she guessed the last to be most likely.
Finally she risked movement. A finger first, twitching experimentally, then the hand, bending the elbow,
and finally shifting the whole arm slowly to one side. No pain, no stiffness. She moved the other one
similarly, took a chance and propped herself up on her elbows; nothing twinged. The dressing shifted
with her, with no feeling of cracking or sliding off.
“Wait,” Juric said then, and partially unhooded the lantern again. He put a gentle hand on her shoulder.
“Pain?”
“No.”
“Lay flat again, and hold still.”
She couldn't help tensing as she settled back down, expecting him to rip the dressing off her back along
with a layer of skin.
His hands patted the dressing lightly here and there, as if testing. He made a clucking, satisfied-sounding
noise, worked his fingers under the edges, and slowly rolled the mass up. It didn't hurt; rather, it felt as if
a layer of wet cloth had just been removed.
“Done,” he said.
Propping herself up, she saw a bundle of fabric in his hands: mottled with an evil, greenish yellow ooze
and interspersed with flecks of thick white, like rotted milk.
“The fire of Comos,” Juric said, holding it up, “removes many evil things from your body. Your first
purification is complete.” He dropped the mess into a leather bag, peeled off thick black gloves, and
dropped them into the bag too. Tying the bag tightly shut, he pushed it to one side and sat back.
“Hungry?”
Even after seeing that revolting mess, her stomach growled at the word. She sat up the rest of the way,
shifting into a cross-legged posture without conscious thought. He smiled and handed her a spoon and a
bowl of the same stew she'd eaten the day before.

Page 153

“I removed the cactus peppers,” he said. “Eat safely.”
She ate the cold stew, watching him steadily as she chewed. He sat quietly, eyes closed, indifferent to her
intent regard.
“Where to now?” she said when she finished, and held out the bowl. He took it without opening his eyes
and set it on the bench beside him.
“The trial of Ishrai,” he said. “We'll be there by morning. Sleep.”
“Will Chac be there?”
“No. He waits at the trial of Datda.”
“Where are my slaves, and my servant Halla?”
“I already told you that,” he said. “They are all with thehask , and safe.”
“Chac wanted to kill Sela and Gria,” Alyea said, unable to resist pushing a bit more. “If they're with him,
how can they be safe?”
Juric opened his eyes and smiled at her.
“They are safe,” he repeated, then doused the lantern. She heard him sliding the panels near him open,
and a chill breeze filtered in through the latticed windows.
“He will not harm them. Sleep.”
She twisted her lips in a silent snarl, then sighed. He clearly had no intention of telling her anything else;
but his advice made sense. She didn't have anything else to do, and her head still felt thick with
exhaustion. As she stretched back out, he draped a thick blanket over her. It occurred to her then that
she still didn't have any clothes on. For some reason, that didn't bother her at all.

Dawn had just begun to streak pale colors across the dark sky when they came to a halt. Unable to
sleep, Alyea had finally taken refuge in an aqeyva trance. The shift in movement shook her out of the
meditation; she opened her eyes and looked at Juric.
He leaned forward and laid her robe across the foot of the bed, then stood.
“Dress and come out when you're ready,ka-s'aAlyea,” he said. He offered her a deep bow, an odd
maneuver in such a cramped space, before leaving.
She took a deep breath, reaching for the calm from the aqeyva trance, but it had shattered beyond
recovery. Her whole body seemed filled with a buzzing tension: not quite anxiety, not quite expectancy.
She'd passed one test; would she pass another, and one more after that?
She pushed the blankets aside and slipped the robe over her head. Juric had called herka-s'a :honored

Page 154

lady . It meant progress: she'd earned status in his eyes at least. She held to that thought as she stepped
out of the carriage.
Juric and the comisti were nowhere in sight. A chunky spire of worn rock towered before her, easily two
hundred feet high and almost that wide. Two tunnel openings were visible from where Alyea stood; one
seemed hardly large enough for a child to crawl through, while the other stood wider and taller than a
large man's reach.
A woman stood in the wider tunnel mouth, watching Alyea. She looked to be shorter than Alyea, unless
distance deceived, and considerably rounder. She wore a robe of either deep green or black; hard to say
in the still-dim light. When she saw Alyea looking at her, she lifted a hand in an unmistakable beckoning
motion.
Alyea stopped an arm's length from the plump woman. Up close, the robe color proved a deep, rich
green. Probably past childbearing age, the woman had dark hair marked with the distinctive iron grey
streaks of an aging deep southerner, and her angular face held a network of thin lines. She studied Alyea
with dark, lively eyes; after a moment, her sober expression split into a wide smile.
“Welcome to the Qisani,” she said in a thicker, more musical accent than Alyea had ever heard before.
“Please follow to me.” She started walking away as Alyea puzzled out what had been said.
Alyea hurried after the woman, catching up in a few swift strides.
“No need to run. I do not move so fast. You could take nap and still catch up.” The woman laughed, the
sound bouncing rich and full from the curved stone walls around them.
Alyea slowed her pace and looked around as they walked. Just past the entrance, the tunnel took a
sharp turn to the right and narrowed briefly. Sturdy doors leaned loose against the wall before the turn.
They looked just the right size to wedge into the tunnel as a barrier; Alyea remembered tales of
skin-shredding sandstorms in the deep desert and shivered.
The walls around them held few tool marks, as if mostly blasted through by years of sandstorms. Alyea
glanced back over her shoulder, wondering how often the storms came.
Lamps were set every few feet. Alyea paused briefly to examine one: it seemed a simple oil lamp, a
rough, lumpy glass globe set in a sturdy iron bracket; but bright green liquid showed inside, and the flame
burned whiter than any she had ever seen.
She put her question about that aside with all the others; one day, she promised herself, she'd sit down
with a native and twist his arm as hard as she could until she had everything answered.
Ahead, the passage opened into a wide room. Alyea followed her guide into the room and stared, mouth
open in unabashed shock. A deep pool of water filled most of the room. Trays of plants floated at the
edges, supported by some sort of inflated bags. Alyea recognized some of the herbs, but most of the
plants were foreign to her. More than one bore brightly colored flowers. Wide stone benches lined the
walls of the room, some with thick, colorful cushions on them. The room felt warm and humid, and
seemed empty of other people.
Light without a source filled the room; looking up, Alyea noticed several slanted openings in the ceiling
and the gleam of mirrors high above. That had to be Sessin's craft; she'd heard of such things in tales of
what the palace had once been. The s'iopes had long ago made sure to smash all such “demon-spawned”
things in Bright Bay beyond recovery.

Page 155

Some people had said, very quietly, that “demon-spawned” meant anything Wezel or his priests did not
understand.
Alyea took another long look at the room, marveling, before focusing her attention on the woman.
“This is theishell,” the woman said, looking around with a satisfied air. “Do you need to empty your
bladder?”
“Yes,” Alyea said.
The woman pointed to the opposite side of the room and politely turned her back. Alyea moved around
the edge of the pool and found a chamber pot that seemed to have been carved from solid rock. She
lifted the heavy lid carefully, holding her breath against the expected stench; but the pot looked as clean
as if it had never been used. A large pile of clean moss, beside the pot, had an obvious purpose. When
she finished, she set the lid back on the pot and walked back to join the woman.
“Refresh yourself,” the woman said, indicating the pool of water.
Alyea hesitated. This didn't seem like a common bathing room, somehow; it felt like a place for sacred
ceremonies, with chanting, drumming and prayer. Dunking her whole body in seemed disrespectful. She
settled for kneeling at the edge and dipping her hands in, with a silent moment of gratitude for the
presence of so much water in such a dry place. She wiped her damp hands over her face and stood,
turning to face her guide again.
The woman nodded, seeming pleased. “You are cautious. That's good. Water is to honor. Even the
water you passed will be used for curing lizard skins. Nothing is wasted here.”
She seemed to expect a reply, but Alyea couldn't think of one.
“Come,” the woman said after waiting a few moments, and turned to leave the room. Alyea followed her,
increasingly confused; had she failed the test already?
Her guide turned down a side passage that Alyea hadn't noticed before, probably because it slanted
sharply back towards the entrance. This passage also led steeply down; rough ridges had been carved in
the floor to improve footing. The lamps they passed sat in deep alcoves and gave off a more muted light
than the ones by the main entrance.
No other passages seemed to branch from this tunnel, but Alyea stayed too busy watching her balance
and footing to look around. At last the slope leveled out, and the tunnel widened into a cavern:
man-made this time, with smoothed-over chisel marks all over the walls.
A large, curved table took up half of the room, with matching benches arranged on either side. Four
women in plain white linen robes sat on the benches, eating what looked like stew from small bowls. A
large black pot, identical to the one Juric's slaves had used, sat to one side, supported on a thick metal
tripod over a small fire pit. Only faintly glimmering coals remained beneath, but steam still rose from
inside the pot.
“Sit,” the plump woman said. “I will get you food.”
Alyea thought about refusing; she'd had enough of the spicy stew already. But it seemed rude, and she

Page 156

might need the nourishment, so she nodded and sat down near the other four women. She picked a spot
carefully, not too close to be intrusive, not so far away as to seem unsociable; they looked up at her,
offered bright, friendly smiles, and went back to eating without a word.
“They are under vow of silence,” the plump woman said, returning with a bowl and wooden spoon. She
set them on the table in front of Alyea and moved to sit across from her, exchanging nods and smiles with
the others.
“Why?” Alyea asked, hoping it wasn't a rude question, and prodded at the stew with her spoon. She
couldn't see any cactus peppers, and the stew looked and smelled different than Juric's had; she risked a
bite.
It tasted creamy rather than sharp, the vegetables soft and the broth thick. Not long ago she would have
thought it bland; now she thanked the gods it didn't have cactus pepper in it.
“They have taken shelter with Ishrai for crimes,” the woman said readily. “They do not speak until they fill
term of service.”
Alyea shifted uncomfortably. It seemed tactless to speak about the women as if they weren't there, but
none of them seemed the least bit offended.
“It is all right,” the woman said, catching her discomfort. “They would say to you themselves, but they are
not allowed. Ask me, ask anything.”
“Juric told me about the comisti,” Alyea said. “I assume this is fairly similar.”
“In many ways, yes,” the woman said. “These women are calledishraidain , and they serve the Qisani
until released.”
Alyea sorted through questions carefully. Whether this conversation served as a test or just a friendly
chat, she didn't think she'd be granted unlimited time for questions. Each one had to count.
“What is the Qisani?” she said at last.
“This,” the woman said with a broad sweep of one thick arm. “This marvelous, wonderful place.
Aerthraim dug out many rooms for us, Sessin gave us glass lamps and oils, F'Heing and Darden have
given herbs and plants. All Families, even lesser ones, donated something. All Families support, tithe
every year, keep us sustained. This rock has always been sacred place. Conclave gave it to Callen of
Ishrai as haven, long time ago, many years ago.”
After Juric's silence, this woman almost overwhelmed Alyea's tight nerves.
The woman sat smiling at her contentedly, completely at ease, and said, “I am sorry I do not introduce
myself or ask your name. I know to you northerns that is rude. We do not use names here. Onlyishai-s'a
is allowed to use names. She will be here soon.”
Alyea took that to mean the woman in front of her wasn't the Callen who would be testing her. Her
tension eased sharply, and she turned her attention to the remaining stew with far more appetite.
“It is good to see someone enjoying stew so much,” the woman said. “We have it almost every day, and
so it becomes dull.”

Page 157

“I'll take anything without cactus peppers in it right now,” Alyea said.
“Oh. . . .” The woman looked dismayed, then puzzled. “But it does have cactus peppers.”
Alyea stopped eating immediately and poked with the spoon through her bowl again, searching. “I don't
see any.”
“We chop up fine,” the woman said. “Oh, I understand. Your comiitaska is from Shakai region. They cut
cactus peppers in strips, and leave inner membrane on. That is where heat lives.”
Alyea nodded, relieved. “Thank you. I was in tears when I bit into one of those strips, but he just
dropped one in his mouth and ate it like it was nothing.”
“Shakain do not think a meal is good unless they burn their mouths,” the woman said. “And they actually
like perocce water.” She shuddered. “Tastes very bad. Most people do not drink it unless they have to.”
“He had something he calledperroc-s'etta,” she said. “Is that. . . .”
Stifled giggles stopped her question. The women around the table stared at her, smothering their
amusement behind their hands. The youngest of them turned bright red. The guide rattled off something in
the desert tongue to the women, and they dropped their hands and turned their attention back to their
food, looking rebuked.
“Do not say that in public,” the guide said, returning her attention to Alyea. “Is crude, is rude word. Let
me think how it would translate for you.” She thought for a moment, then said, “Perrocis cactus;s'etta is
male . . . fluid. Do you understand?”
Her stomach lurched. “Yes,” she said, swallowing hard. “Unfortunately, I do.”
The guide looked surprised for a moment, then shook her head violently. “No, no,” she said, looking
frustrated. “It is only from a cactus, but the Shakain name translates that way. There is not anything mixed
in.” She made a face, as if disgusted at the thought.
Alyea breathed a sigh of relief. “Why do they call it that?”
“The Shakain are very male,” her guide said. “They celebrate men, do you understand? Everything men.
Very unusual for a Shakain to take the path of Comos. Comos is not male, is not female. Callen of
Comos must to be . . . neutral. Not sex. Not. . . .”
She grimaced and made a motion with one hand like scissors opening and closing. “Do you see?”
Alyea stared at the woman, horror-struck. “They have to becastrated?”
“Yes, yes, that is the word,” the woman said, cheerful again.
“Women too?”
“No, no,” the woman said, waving her hands. “Women understand balance better than men. But they
have to be past the time of blood to go out in the world. Younger women stay with their, with their. . . .”
She grimaced, shaking her head. “I cannot translate it.”

Page 158

“With their teacher and community,” a new voice said from behind them.
“Yes,” the woman said, and bowed her head. “My thanks,ishai-s'a.”
“And mine to you.S'aAlyea, if you would come with me?”
Alyea stood, studying the woman who had just entered the room.
Theishai-s'a stood easily a foot taller than Alyea. A thick braid of dark hair, pulled forward over her left
shoulder, reached to her stomach. Her face had the angularity of an old desert line, but Alyea couldn't
place which one. In contrast to the guide, this woman looked as if she didn't have any extra fat on her
body, other than in the generous curves that her thin robe did absolutely nothing to conceal.
Alyea remembered a Bright Bay saying:A woman to make a eunuch cry This woman, without making a
single seductive movement, fit that description perfectly. Alyea wondered if that was why she stayed
hidden away in the middle of nowhere: surrounded, presumably, only by women.
The tall woman waited patiently, smiling; Alyea realized she'd been staring. “My apologies,ishai-s'a,” she
murmured hastily, dropping her gaze. She could feel a flush starting to climb across her face.
She heard a series of choked noises from behind her that could have been laughter.
“No,s'a Alyea,” the tall woman said, “you have not earned the right to call me that yet.” Her dark stare
moved past Alyea to the table beyond. The sounds from the other women stopped short.
“Gods,” Alyea said under her breath. She felt fumbling and hopeless, afraid to even speak now. “I'm
sorry.”
“You only repeated what you heard, and that was a word you should not have heard yet,” the tall woman
said, still staring past Alyea at the now-quiet women. “You will learn. Come with me.”
She led Alyea back to the ishell and motioned her to sit on one of the benches. Eyeing the stone surface,
Alyea chose one with a cushion. The woman drew a curtain across the doorway; it looked like hundreds
of rough glass beads, strung on individual lines, and settled in place with a gentle chinkling noise, swaying
slowly for some time.
The tall woman moved to sit beside Alyea, turning herself sideways, and sat cross-legged; Alyea copied
the movement, careful to keep space between so their knees didn't touch. The woman's presence was
close to overwhelming; not sexual, exactly, butpowerful . Alyea felt as if she sat within reach of a blazing
fire that produced all the impact of heat without burning her flesh.
“You may call meka-s'a-ishrait . That translates to 'honored Callen woman of Ishrai,'” the woman said.
“If that is too long, simply 'ishrait' will serve.” She smiled. “The other term means 'sister under Ishrai.' It
should not have been said in your presence; you do not bear our mark. If you pass your blood trial, you
may use that term; not before.”
“I'm sorry,” Alyea said again.
The ishrait shook her head. “Apologize once. If your words are not accepted the first time, they will
never be accepted. It is a weakness to apologize many times.”

Page 159

Alyea nodded.
The woman studied her for a moment, seeming to deliberate, then said, “You are a problem,s'a Alyea.
Do you understand that? No. I can see you don't.” She sighed. “The blood trials are not a short process.
The trial for Comos alone can take weeks to months; you went through it in less than two days. The trial
of Ishrai should take a full year and should come last. You will be given less than a week. You are being
given very short trials, and out of proper order.”
Alyea picked a question carefully. “Why have the trials been shortened for me?”
“Politics,” the ishrait said. “You are, as I understand it, in a unique position: King's Emissary, proxy
holder to Scratha lands, and sent with ahask and asheth-hinnas advisor and protector. You own two
ugren slaves, one of whom may upset a very delicate balance in the southlands. You're under the
protection of athass , but the teyanain are hunting you in defiance of that protection.”
“Pardon, ishrait,” Alyea said, “I don't know most of those terms. I can't fully understand what you're
saying.”
“Sheth-hinnis an assassin,” the ishrait said.
That had to be Micru. “What about—”
“Thass,” the woman said, cutting her off, “is a person with great status, beyond even noble rank. It is not
your king,” she added, seeing the expression on Alyea's face. “Your king has little status in the
southlands. I have been asked not to tell you the name of your thass just yet.” Alyea reflexively began
sorting through names that might suit. Chac? But Juric had spoken of him with utter contempt. Or had it
been Chac Juric referred to, after all? What if one of her guards was actually the mysterioushask ?
The ishrait smiled, as though sensing Alyea's confusion, then went on, “When your thass asked to bring
you here to be tested, it alarmed me deeply. The involvement of the teyanain only makes matters worse.
You put us all in danger,s'a Alyea. This is not a good place for you to be.” She glanced at the pool with a
frown and seemed to hold herself back from saying more.
Alyea shook her head slowly, then stopped, afraid the ishrait would see it as rejection. A question finally
came clear, and Alyea worded it with care: “Will shorter tests be open to political challenges?”
The ishrait sighed. “No,” she said. “That's part of my concern,s'a . The reason the tests take so long is
that they involve instruction to prepare the supplicant for the trial. You are having the trials without any
preparation. You cannot imagine how dangerous that is, especially for the trial of Ishrai. I am astounded
that Juric granted you the mark of Comos. I know Juric; he would not have granted you more than one
mistake. Most supplicants are given three, even after months of preparation, but Juric is a very hard
man.”
Alyea felt a sharp chill run down her spine. “He told me that by giving me a second chance he was giving
more than most Callen,” she said. “Were those his exact words?”
Alyea thought back. “ 'I will give you a second chance, which others would not.' "
“Callen are allowed to lie during the blood trials,” the ishrait said. “But he must like you. He only twisted
his words. It would have been kinder for him to say 'I will only grant you one mistake, where most give

Page 160

three; be warned.' But that is not Juric's way, especially with a woman. He has served Comos for many
years, and he does try to be fair, but he was raised Shakain and has not totally lost that bias.”
“Or his love for cactus peppers?”
The ishrait's smile returned. “Every time I see him, we hold a contest to see who can eat the most cactus
pepper before reaching for tea. I am not Shakain, but I come from a village near the Haunted Lands, and
their spices are far bolder than in Shakai. Juric was not always a Callen, and neither was I; we traveled
together for many years, and he still comes by whenever he can. It is very likely he volunteered to test
you so that he could come see me.”
“I thought. . . .” Alyea started, then bit her tongue.
The woman seemed to understand. “Eunuch? Of course,” she said. “But that does not stop a friendship,
does it?”
“I'm sorry, ishrait,” Alyea said. “That was rude.”
“It's a common reaction from northerns,” the ishrait said. “We believe the choice to give up that part of
life is a powerful decision. Anyone strong enough to do that, for whatever reason, should be respected
and honored, not mocked as a weakling as northerns do.”
Alyea thought of the fat, sour old eunuchs she'd seen in the courts all her life, and the spare, vibrant
energy of Juric, and had to agree a vast difference lay between the two.
The ishrait drew a deep breath and let it out slowly, closing her eyes while she exhaled. “S'aAlyea, Juric
no doubt told you that once you begin the blood trials, you cannot stop. That was truth. I should not tell
you this, because the decision should come from the soul, not the mind, but there are two exceptions he
would not have mentioned. One, you may break from the trials by swearing service to one of the three
gods as a Callen. Callen renounceall claims in the world; family, status, bloodline, political power . . .
slaves . . . lovers. We are removed from all debts and dishonors, and nobody can lay hand on us for past
actions. Once we go into the world again, of course, we are held accountable for actions from that point
on; but anything prior to the oath is gone as if it never happened. Not even the teyanain would dare
breach that beginning neutrality.”
Acana paused, watching Alyea's face closely, then went on, “The other option is to volunteer to
participate in another supplicant's blood trial. That is considered a holy service and frees the volunteer
from all previous commitments and challenges, wiping your past clean just like the first option. But the
decision to accept a volunteer rests with the Callen administering the trial, and you may only volunteer
once in your entire life; so if the Callen rejects your offered service you cannot try elsewhere. I do not
recommend you take that option. But it is your life, and your choice. I cannot advise you further on the
matter.”
The ishrait dropped her gaze to her linked hands, a faint crease across her forehead, and waited for a
reply.
Alyea considered, looking at the issue from as many angles as she could think of. Distilled to bluntness,
what the woman had said was:You're racing against death. I don't think you're going to win. Here's a
way out.
Juric's words came back to her:The test of Comos is a test to see if you can set your own welfare aside

Page 161

for the larger good. What would happen to Halla, Sela, and Gria if she abandoned her responsibility to
them because she feared for her own life? What about the trust placed in her by the king? What would
happen to Scratha Fortress and lands, if the representative sent to hold them walked away from that
position?
“I thank you, ishrait,” Alyea said finally, “but I won't do that. I won't turn away from the people that are
looking to me to carry this through. I won't turn away from myself. If I die through the trials or through
the teyanain, at least I'll die with honor.”
The ishrait looked up again, a broad smile appearing. “Now I do believe you passed Juric's test without
flinching,” she said. “I will allow you to take the blood trial of Ishrai.”
Alyea hadn't expected that; but looking back over what Juric had said, and untangling his words, she
understood.Not all supplicants are accepted. But he hadn't told her, directly, that each and every Callen
had to accept her individually.
She shut her eyes and swallowed hard, realizing what a fine edge she'd been walking; then wondered
how many lies the woman had just told her.
Callen are allowed to lie during the blood trials.
She'd have to watch the ishrait very carefully.
“Come,” the ishrait said, swinging her legs off the bench and standing. “I will prepare you for the trial.”

Chapter Fifteen
The house with the blue roof had a matching blue door, and the small yard around it looked neat and
tidily kept. Several large pots of herbs and vegetables stood in the sunniest parts of the yard. For some
reason, Red frowned when he saw that, and checked his step.
“The rose bush is gone,” he said under his breath, looking around.
The door opened just then, and a tall, heavy-set woman came out, carrying a small bowl and a knife.
“Good day,” she said amiably, then squinted at Red. “Do I know you,s'e ?”
Afraid the man was about to bolt, Idisio elbowed him lightly in the side. It seemed to break Red out of
his paralysis.
“Ah . . . I'm looking for Yhaine,” he said hoarsely.
The woman's stillness warned Idisio of trouble before she spoke.
“I'm sorry,s'e ,” she said. “Yhaine died years ago.”

Page 162

“And . . . and her son?” Red said in a near-whisper. “The boy?”
The woman came a few steps closer, studying him. “I remember you now. You're that sailor she was
fond of for a time. I'm her older sister Filhane.”
Red nodded. His expression held a heartbreaking mix of dread and hope. “The boy,s'a?”
“Why do you ask?” the woman said, cocking her head to one side, a hard light in her eyes now. “You
think you're the father? Bit late in the day to come knocking, isn't it?”
Red began to shift his weight back, as if readying himself to retreat. Idisio kicked his ankle and said
loudly, “He only just found out,s'a . Have some mercy, would you?”
The sailor looked lost and bewildered at the unexpected support. Filhane transferred her hard-eyed stare
to Idisio, who glared back with every ounce of street-thief gall he could muster.
“He only just found out,” Idisio repeated, more softly. “Look at his face,s'a , if you doubt his sincerity.”
Filhane took a long look at Red, then sighed. “I'm sorry,” she said. “Listen to me then, sailor: you may
have bedded my sister, but I doubt you knew her. Let go of the romantic memory I can see in your eyes.
She wasn't like that at all.”
Red frowned and opened his mouth to speak; Filhane held up a hand and went on. “She was sweet,
when she wanted something. And mean as a roused micru when she was denied. She actually did like
you; that's why I remember you. But I'll bet you never saw her mean streak, or theesthit she used.”
“That must have been after. . . .” Red began.
“No,” Filhane said. “She started usingesthit when she was ten. I couldn't stop her. Nobody could. Our
father beat her time after time after time and couldn't make her stop. I begged and pleaded and screamed
at her. Nothing worked. I'll guarantee that every time you saw her, she was lost on dream-dust.”
Red began to look angry now, sullen, as if he wanted to argue. Filhane didn't give him a chance.
“Here's something else for you, to take the shine off that romantic memory of yours: you weren't the only
man she was bedding back then,” she went on remorselessly. “Don't look like that. Did you hold faithful
to her, when you were in another port?”
Red opened his mouth, shut it again, then looked at the ground, a deep flush beginning to crawl up his
neck.
“I didn't think so,” Filhane said. “Believe me, sailor, as much as you don't want to hear this, I wish I didn't
have to say it more. But my sister was a whore, and addicted to esthit, and no amount of wishing will
make it different.”
Red took a deep breath and rubbed the back of his neck with one large hand. “Thank you,s'a . That's a
good hard lesson you've handed me. I'll leave you in peace.”
“Wait,” Idisio said, grabbing the man's arm hard, just below the elbow, as Red began to turn away. “The
boy. What about her son?”

Page 163

“He's likely not even mine,” Red said bleakly. “I was a fool to think that.”
“Now that I don't know,” Filhane said. “What made you think he was yours in the first place?”
Idisio tightened his grip; after a moment, Red said, thickly, “The man who told me of the boy said the
child had red hair.”
“Red hair?” The woman's eyebrows rose. “He's seen the child, then. I never did. Yhaine was out of the
house and living with another man by the time her pregnancy was showing. There was enough bad feeling
between us by then that we never saw the child; it took me months to get word of her death. I always
thought the child must have died stillborn, as there was no word of it to be found.”
Red stood very still. Idisio, glancing up at the sailor, saw a mad glitter surfacing in the blue eyes.
“He's seen the child,” Red repeated softly under his breath. Idisio doubted the man had heard much past
that point. “Living with another man.”
“If the child has red hair,” Filhane said, “it may well be yours, after all. There aren't many redheaded
sailors come through this port, and you're the only one I can remember my sister taking up with during
that time. I'd track down that man she was living with, to find out what happened.”
“I'll do that,” Red said. “Do you know his name?”
Filhane frowned, thinking for a moment. “Something like Ikle or Itckl.”
“Iticali?” Red said.
“Yes, that was the name,” Filhane said. “You know him?”
“That,” Red said through his teeth, “is the oldfriend who told me about the boy.” His hands clenched into
fists.
Filhane retreated a cautious step. “I don't know much else,” she said. “I think Iticali was in the service of
some desert lord at the time. Perhaps he placed the child with his lord's family.”
“Which lord?” Red said.
“I don't know, sailor,” Filhane said. “I have no more answers for you, but I do have work to do. Please,
take your righteous anger elsewhere; I've no time or help for it. I gave up on being angry about my sister
years ago.”
Red turned without a word and walked out of the small yard; and this time, Idisio made no move to stop
him.
“Boy,” Filhane called as he turned to follow the sailor.
Idisio paused, casting an inquiring look over his shoulder.
“If you do find the child . . . send me word?”
Idisio nodded, not trusting his voice, and ran to catch up with the fastmoving sailor.

Page 164

“Not our problem,” Cafad Scratha said, some hours later. “Absolutely not. Don't even think about it this
time, Idisio. We've enough problems as it is. Don't add a randy northern sailor to the pile.”
“But—” Idisio started.
“No,” Scratha said. “He'll have to find his own answers.” “You're a desert lord, though,” Idisio said,
persistent against Scratha's gathering scowl. “You could get answers he couldn't.”
“I swore I wouldn't hit you again,” Scratha said through his teeth.
“Don't make me break that promise. Let it go, Idisio. You don't know what you're asking.”
“Thentell me,” Idisio said. “How am I any good to you if you have to protect me from my ignorance?”
They matched glares; then Scratha sighed.
“I should have left you in the streets,” he said, without any real force. “Asking for anything, whether it be
favors, goods, or information, carries
a price in the southlands. I don't want to be indebted to someone for the sake of a foolish northern
sailor.”
Idisio breathed a quiet sigh of relief. The strangeness had left his lord for the moment, the dark track of
his thoughts diverted to something less important. And this language he understood; the street thieves of
Bright Bay operated in much the same way.
“I'll pay it,” he said.
Scratha stared at him. “You can't. You have nothing to pay with, Idisio. It's a generous offer, but it's not
possible.”
“I can,” Idisio said, sure of himself now. “What kind of things would another lord ask for?”
“It could be anything,” Scratha said. “And it's not the lords that you need to worry about; it's the hirelings
and mercenaries. Some of them are. . . not kind. Idisio, no. Let this northern find his own answers.”
“What's the worst thing they could ask for?” Idisio pressed. “What's the worst you've ever heard of
being asked in exchange for this kind of information? It's pretty trivial, isn't it, asking after a lost child?”
Scratha drew a deep breath and shut his eyes. “You don't want to know.”
“I do.”
“Youdon't,” Scratha said without opening his eyes. “It's foul.” Idisio waited, not speaking, until his lord
finally looked at him, then said, in as emotionless a voice as he could, “I've probably done it already,
whatever it is. That's part of growing up in the streets.”
Scratha stared at him, looking horrified.

Page 165

“The people that raised me didn't give free handouts,” Idisio said. “They wanted a profit out of their
effort. That's how it is. That's why I jumped at the chance to go with you.” He paused, drew a deep
breath, and forced his tone to become flat and hard. “If you don't help Red, I'll go asking myself.”
“No,” Scratha said, and it was an order, carrying an unspoken threat that Idisio would be lucky to
escape with bruises if he disobeyed. Idisio swallowed hard and threw his last die, praying his hunch about
Scratha's one vulnerability turned out to be right. “I used to dream, at night, that my father would come
find me,” he
said. His voice wouldn't obey him; it wavered and stuck. At least he wasn't crying. “I used to think one
day, everything would be all right, it would all turn out to be a bad dream or a mistake. Someone would
rescue me. But nobody ever did, my lord; I pulled myself out on your tail, and you were kind enough to
let me. Not everyone is that lucky.” Scratha started to speak, stopped, swallowed hard, and said,
“There's nothing saying he's on the streets, Idisio.”
“There's nothing saying he's not,” Idisio shot back.
“Sessii ta-karne, i shha!” Scratha spat, suddenly furious; the moment passed quickly, and he rubbed his
temples as if to ease a headache. “Fine. I'll ask around. If youswear to keep your own mouth shut.”
“I promise,” Idisio said readily. “What did all that mean, just now?”
“If you ever learn the old language,” Scratha said, his expression still sour, “you're welcome to punch me
for what I just called you. Now go away.” He tossed Idisio a gold round. “Take Riss out for a good
meal, and buy yourselves some proper desert clothes. I don't have time to see to it now. If you run out of
money, tell them to send me the bill. And go find Red; tell him to come see me.”
“Yes, my lord, thank you, my lord,” Idisio said, and bolted before the man could change his mind.

He went after Red first, reasoning that the search would be quicker without a girl tagging along. It didn't
take long for Idisio to be glad of that decision. Several of the streets and taverns he passed through in his
search made him nervous, and a female face would have caused a riot in at least one of them.
He finally found the sailor, sitting alone in a dark and musty-smelling wine shop, staring at an almost-full
glass of wine. Judging by the bartender's expression, the sailor had been sitting without drinking for some
time.
“Idisio,” Red said, looking up with a distracted frown. “What are you doing here?”
“Looking for you,” Idisio said. “My lord wants to see you.”
“What for?”
“I talked him into helping you look for your son,” Idisio said, and watched the dour expression lighten
into incredulity.
“Why would he do something like that? Why would you?” Red stood, leaning forward onto the table as if
in need of the support. “You walked me there, like I asked; you don't owe me anything else.”

Page 166

Idisio shrugged. “Better hurry, before he changes his mind.”
“Gods,” the man said, and threw a silver coin on the table. “Where do I find him?”
“Silver Sands Inn,” Idisio said. “Wait, I'm headed back there too. . .” But the sailor had already slammed
through the door and was almost running down the street. Idisio sighed, offered the sullen barkeep a
shrug, and followed.
Not in a hurry now, he found himself paying more attention to the people he passed, especially the
younger ones. Ten to fifteen, Red had said; no older than Idisio, and with bright red hair. Something
about that tugged at his memory, disturbing him. He'd known a boy with bright red hair once, in Bright
Bay; could it have been . . . ? But that was ridiculous, of course. He put it out of his mind.
Once or twice his step slowed too much, and he found himself the target of coarse invitation by nearby
whores, male and female alike. He'd never liked those offers, and with old memories churning fresh in his
mind, liked them even less. He shook his head each time and hurried past without speaking.
He made it back to the inn without seeing a single naturally redtopped head, male, female, adult, or child.
There were even more people in this town with dyed hair than there had been in Bright Bay, but the
colors here tended towards blue and yellow and even white, all in strips, usually set in dozens of long,
tight braids. An astonishing number of people, young and old, were shaven completely bald. Many wore
thin, hoodlike head coverings that wrapped around the face, leaving only the eyes visible.
As Idisio entered the inn, he belatedly thought about what he'd just done: challenged a desert lord and
offered himself as payment for whatever debt was incurred. Jumped in on the side of a near stranger, a
randy northerner as Scratha had named him.
He'd lost his mind. What had he beenthinking ?
Traveling away from the city had softened his survival wits. He'd had it too easy, too safe, for too long;
he'd jumped straight into madness without even looking first.
With barely a glance at Idisio, the innkeeper told him the room numbers, sounding thoroughly distracted.
Idisio offered thanks with little more coherence. His troubled thoughts carried him blindly to the door of
the room he would be sharing with Scratha. He could hear voices inside, and decided Red and Scratha
were best left alone for the moment. Riss had the next room over; he moved to it and knocked softly on
the door.
After a moment, he rapped harder, and that brought an indistinct mutter from inside. It sounded like an
invitation, and Idisio, mind still fixed on the enormity of what he'd just done, pushed through the door and
stepped inside.
More bare skin than Seshya had ever shown him presented itself.
“Ohdeargods,” he said, and slammed back out of the room, eyes shut tight. Weak-kneed, he leaned
against the opposite wall and tried to think of a way to pretend he hadn't just walked in on Riss with no
clothes on.
He hadn't managed anything beyond slowing his racing heart by the time the door opened. Riss stared at
him, wearing a light robe and looking bemused herself.

Page 167

After a moment, she said, “Your hearing's not much good, is it? Isaid 'wait a minute.'”
Idisio shook his head dumbly, looking anywhere but at her.
“Gods, you're an idiot,” Riss said after a moment, sounding impatient. “Come on in; don't stand there in
the hallway. You look like you're about to faint.”
“No,” Idisio said, aware that his voice was emerging at a rather higher octave than usual. “That's all right,
I just. . . .”
“Oh, for the love of the gods,” Riss said. She grabbed his arm, yanked him into the room and closed the
door behind him. “Haven't you ever seen a girl without clothes on before? It'shot here! I was trying to
cool off. Sit down.”
He shook his head, still at a complete loss for words, and sank into the chair she pointed to.
“Was there something important, or did you just barge into my room for fun?” Riss said waspishly.
“Ah,” he said, intensely grateful for a question hedidhave a good answer to. “Lord Scratha wants me to
take you out for a meal and to buy some clothes. Proper desert clothes, he said.” He took a chance and
opened his eyes again.
“Good,” Riss said. “Everything I have makes me sweat. Did you find the sailor's boy?”
“No,” he said, staring determinedly at the floor. “He's gone. . . .”
He felt a sudden dizziness, and a hot, dry wind whispered against his cheeks and forehead. The taste of
sand rolled against his tongue. A memory rose, of the red-haired boy he'd known and his odd
mannerisms; hehad been southern. He might have been Red's son, after all. Wouldn't that be funny . . .
but the thought held no real humor against the continuing overlay of wind whispering in his mind.
The moment passed. Riss knelt beside him, her face white, gripping his arm hard. “I thought you were
about to faint. What happened?”
“Nothing.” He blinked, trying to focus. “I just . . . I just need to go eat something. I haven't eaten today. I
think. Let's get going.”
She stared at him for a moment, then cautiously released his arm as if afraid he would fall over. He stood,
correcting a slight wobble before she could react to it.
“Wait outside, then, so I can dress,” she said, looking as if she held back much sharper words. Idisio left
the room and leaned against the opposite wall again. Like before, his knees felt treacherously unready to
support him, but this time it wasn't embarrassment and shock; it was fear.

It happened again while they were walking back to the inn.
Full, content, and relaxed, he began telling Riss about the visit with Filhane and about Scratha agreeing to

Page 168

help. He glossed over how he'd gained his lord's support, and although Riss gave him a hard look
reminiscent of the one Azni had used weeks ago, she left it alone.
“So what now?” Riss said. “Is this sailor going to be traveling with us?”
“I don't know,” Idisio said, startled. “I hadn't thought of that. I figured they'd ask some questions locally;
the boy can't be far from here, can he?”
“If he's been taken into a desert lord's family, he could be anywhere,” Riss pointed out.
“I don't think. . . .” Idisio started, and his vision blurred again.
He felt a sense of being elsewhere and other than himself. Stone walls rose around him and silence,
blessed silence, and a warmth began in his chest; the faintest glimmer of hope that it was over, that he had
found a safe place at last, and ananger . . . .
He came back to himself, on his knees, his cheek stinging as if Riss had slapped him. His throat felt raw,
and the packages he'd been carrying were scattered over the ground as if he'd thrown his arms out wide
and heedless.
“Youscreamed ,” Riss said, her face white. Her voice trembled as she went on, “I think you made one
man piss himself. I almost did.Gods , what's going on with you?”
“I don't know,” he said. People were beginning to gather around, staring. He climbed to his feet, brushed
off his knees, and started picking up the dropped bundles.
“Let's get back to the inn,” Riss said. “Quickly.”

“You have to tell Lord Scratha,” she said once they were back in the inn. They'd gone to Riss's room by
unspoken agreement; the packages were piled in a corner.
“No,” he said immediately, hunching into himself. Afterimages still danced through his mind at odd
moments; a phantom glimpse of red hair, a tickling urge to scream and never stop.
“You have to,” Riss insisted. “He'll know what to do. What are you afraid of?”
“I'm not afraid,” he said, lying altogether; the lift of her eyebrows called him on it. Before they could
argue further, a knock sounded and Scratha stepped in without waiting for invitation.
“I see where you learned your manners,” Riss said a bit sourly.
Scratha cast her a puzzled look, then shrugged it aside without asking. “It's getting late. We have to get
up early in the morning. If you could manage without Idisio's company, we all need to get some sleep.”
“Lord,” Riss said, ignoring Idisio's frantic motion to stop her, “Idisio needs to talk to you.”
“No,” Idisio said, ducking his face away from the dark stare turning his way. “No, I'm all right.”

Page 169

“He's had fits twice in the last four hours,” Riss said over his protest. “He's afraid to tell you for some
reason.”
“Thank you, Riss,” Scratha said, voice completely calm. “Idisio, come.”
Idisio shot Riss a poisonous glare as he left the room; she shrugged and made a shooing motion with her
hands.
“Fits,” Scratha said quietly a few moments later, closing the door behind them. He moved to the edge of
the low bed and sat down. “Tell me.”
Seeing no point in protest, Idisio gave as much detail as he could remember of each incident. When he
finished talking, Scratha shut his eyes, pinched the bridge of his nose, then sighed and dropped his hand.
“Have you been practicing the aqeyva meditations?” he asked.
“Every day,” Idisio said. “Hours a day.”
“Hours,” Scratha repeated, and shook his head. His dark eyes scrunched more tightly closed, then
opened again. “I didn't think you'd practice that much on your own. I should have paid more attention.”
“Did I do something wrong?” Idisio said, bewildered. “I thought I was getting really good at it. Is that
wrong?”
Scratha let out a half-snort, half-laugh. “Wrong? No. But you should have had more guidance. I should
have been watching you. I let my own concerns distract me. You've been in trance forhoursa day?” He
sounded as if he hoped the answer might change to“No, I lied.”
“It passed the time,” Idisio said, trying to sound indifferent. He fought an urge to cower; the very air
seemed to have darkened with the desert lord's mood.
“Do you have any idea how rare that is?” Scratha said. “I've been practicing aqeyva most of my life and
can't hold a full trance more than two hours.”
“It's just . . . paying attention to yourself,” Idisio said, fumbling for words. “It's not that hard. I don't
understand, my lord. It's no different than seeing what's really in front of you, like when you had me look
at that mug; I just never thought to turn it to myself before. And it would have been dangerous, losing
track of everything around me like that. But it's not that hard.”
Scratha shook his head again, his expression bemused. “You make it sound so simple,” he said. “Only
aqeyva masters can do what you've done. And these visions, and not being affected by Yuer's drugs . .
.You never had anything like this before you started practicing?”
“No,” Idisio said after a moment's thought. “I've always relied on hunches, but nothing, ever, as . . . as
solid as these. They're almost visions.”
“That's exactly what they are,” Scratha said. He rubbed at his eyes. “I think you have Ghost Lake blood,
Idisio. You have too much northern in your face for anything else.”
“What's . . . ?” Idisio stopped, remembering Red's song. “That's the place up by Arason? Those stories

Page 170

are real?”
“Oh, yes. There was more truth than myth to the tales that sent witchhunters to Arason. How you came
to Bright Bay I don't understand, and we'll probably never know, but you'reha'ra'ha , without a doubt.”
Idisio shut his eyes. He thought he might scream. “What's aha'ra'ha ?”
After a brief silence, Scratha said, “It's . . . well, we'll talk about it more, later. I need time to think how
to explain it. I never thought I'd have to . . . well. Go to sleep. We can talk in the morning.”
Idisio accepted that decision with deep relief; but after a time of staring up through the darkness,
wide-eyed and wakeful, began to regret letting it pass. At last he said, tentatively, “Lord Scratha?”
The desert lord sighed. “I can't sleep either,” he admitted. “All right. I don't suppose you've learned any
real history, so I'll have to start a ways back for you to make sense of the answer. That's why I've
needed to think, to find the shortest way to explain.” He blew out a gusty breath and shifted on the low
bed. “You're not fully human, Idisio.”

Chapter Sixteen
After dark, the ishell felt very different from the spacious, welcoming place Alyea had seen earlier in the
day. Globes of oil similar to those in the passageways had been set on the floor near the walls at
measured intervals, but gave off such dim light that most of the room lay in shadow.
Women in white robes, with hoods drawn forward to hide their faces, occupied every bench: sitting
cross-legged and facing each other as Alyea and the ishrait had done earlier in the day. The pool looked
like a black pit now, and not at all welcoming. Alyea couldn't tell where the stone ended and the water
began. She stood in the doorway to the ishell, uncertain and unreasonably terrified, and waited for
someone to tell her what to do.
A hand touched her shoulder from behind. Alyea stopped a frightened squeak just before it emerged
from her mouth and turned to meet the dark gaze of the ishrait. In the eerie light of the room, the woman's
face seemed a thing of stark and cold angles. The power she had resonated earlier in the day had shifted
into something much broader and deeper, a thing of deep roots and old knowledge.
“Disrobe,” the ishrait commanded.
Alyea slipped out of the light robe; the woman reached out and took it from her.
“Stand at the edge of the pool.”
Alyea felt her way across the floor, wary of stubbing her toes. Past the benches, she moved even more
cautiously, testing for the edge of the water with each step. At last a slight slickness and a dip in the floor
warned her she'd come close; she stopped, turning to face the ishrait.
“There is a mat a step to your left,” the ishrait said. “Sit down, facing me.”

Page 171

Alyea obeyed. The mat felt like a smoothly-woven blanket folded on itself to create thickness. She drew
her legs up and tried to tuck her feet under herself; the room had become surprisingly cold.
“The sisters of Ishrai form a community in which the opinions of all are valued,” the ishrait said.
“Therefore, the first part of the test is a series of questions, one from each sister of Ishrai gathered here.
You must answer to their complete satisfaction to continue. You may take as long as you like to think
about the questions, but you must answer fully and honestly. Do you accept these terms?”
Alyea swallowed. “Yes.”
The ishrait's voice became deeper and more formal. “Sisters, before us is a supplicant for the blood trial
of Ishrai. I have granted her petition.Taishell te s'a-naila ; the blood trial begins. She is open to you now.
Ask her what you wish.”
A voice came from somewhere in front of her. “Supplicant, you have no name, no titles, no status in this
place of Ishrai. Does that change your purpose?”
Alyea considered the question carefully. If she truly had no name, if all her titles and privileges were
stripped from her, would that stop her? Would she be free to abandon Gria and Sela, and stop worrying
about them and the job laid upon her by the king?
“No,” she said at last. “I will continue regardless.”
Another voice echoed through the chamber. “Supplicant, do you act for yourself or for others?”
Alyea began to answer, then stopped, frowning into the darkness around her. She had to pass the blood
trials because she'd been charged with holding Scratha Fortress by the king; and she wanted to do that
not for his sake, but for her own. He'd handed her a powerful position: hadn't her first thought been that
she would outrank Pieas? She'd agreed to the position for her own purposes. Still, she felt genuine
concern and thought for others had been involved in her decisions. She considered another moment, and
finally said, “Both.”
“Do you always think of others in your decisions?”
“No,” she said. She'd expected something similar, and had an answer ready. “I have been selfish much of
my life. I see that, and regret it, and wish to change that behavior.”
“Define selfish.”
Alyea bit her lip. “It's thinking first of yourself, to the harm of others,” she said, trying to keep from
sounding uncertain.
“Who have you harmed, and how?”
She stared from darkness into the steady ring of light at the edges of the room, and didn't know what to
say. The silence seemed to stretch forever. “I should have listened to my elders,” she said, unable to
come up with anything more coherent.
The question was repeated in an eerie flat tone that echoed through the room. “Who have you harmed,
and how?”

Page 172

. . .how . . . how . . . hhhhwwww . . . ohh. . . .
The whispering echoes faded away to silence.
Alyea shut her eyes, feeling suddenly ill. One chance gone; only two more left, if this went by the rules the
ishrait had explained earlier. A memory rose in her mind: Ethu's fixed grimace as the whips descended
again and again.
“I caused the death of a good man,” she whispered. Tears spilled down her cheeks. “By not being willing
to stand up for my truth, I allowed a man with more courage than I to die in my place.”
“Was his death truly your fault?”
She drew breath to insist it had been, but the words twisted in her mouth.
“No,” she heard herself say. Her voice came out hard and rough from deep in her throat. “No. It was
them, the priests, not me. I wish I could kill them all!”
Alyea hadn't cried back then, hadn't cried during her own punishment, or afterwards; under constant
watch, she hadn't dared display weakness. By the time that danger passed, grief had been pushed into a
steely anger against the priests. But now that long-standing shield dissolved; tears came, unleashed with
the force of a long-delayed wave. She bent over, locking her elbows around her knees, and found herself
actually howling with anger and pain.
As if a ghost were in the room, she thought she heard Ethu's voice whisperingno tears , but she couldn't
seem to stop.
Her sobs were the only sound for a long time. When her breath slowed to occasional hitches, she sat
back up, drawing an arm across her face. She looked around at the silent women and thought,Well, I've
failed this one for sure.
Another voice spoke, from her right this time. “What teaching do you follow?”
Still shaken by her emotional outburst, Alyea found words hard to assemble. “I . . . I don't have one,”
she said. “I was taught to follow the northern s'iopes, but that was just to keep me alive.”
“Is your learning of our ways aimed only at keeping you alive?”
Alyea bit her lip. An edge to that question warned her she'd moved onto dangerous ground.
“There are people depending on me,” she said carefully. “I won't survive the trials if I don't learn your
lessons, and I can't help anyone if I'm dead.” Prompted by a mad impulse, she added dryly: “Personally,
as well, I'd rather stay alive.”
She saw no visible reaction to her attempt at humor. Even a flicker of a smile would have been
tremendously reassuring; the constant, emotionless drone of the questions and the surrounding silence
raised a cold sweat on the back of her neck.
“You are putting your own life at risk for the sake of another's orders. If you pass all the trials and
become a desert lord, what then?”

Page 173

Alyea started to say:I'll do the task he sent me here to do. She held the words, sensing a larger question.
For the first time, she thought about the possibility of succeeding, of holding Scratha Fortress as an actual
desert lord. What would she do?
Return to Bright Bay? Her new status would throw her entire family into disarray. No Peysimun had ever
held rank as high as desert lord. They wouldn't know what to do with her. They'd be terrified.
Desert lords never stayed in Bright Bay for long. They wandered through and left again, ignoring the
people scurrying out of their way. Sometimes they came to court gatherings; sometimes they just showed
up for no apparent reason and left again a few days later. She wouldn't be welcome for very long; it
would make people too nervous.
Dozens of small political alliances throughout the court would be disrupted by the fact that a minor family
had abruptly acquired powerful connections. And what would Oruen do with her, a potentially dangerous
new force in his court? He couldn't allow her to stay in Bright Bay unless she labored under a tight leash
of his own making; and she knew she wouldn't stand for that. He likely knew that too, which led to
unpleasant suspicions she didn't want to think about.
Stay in the desert? Where? Once Scratha returned and took possession of his fortress again, she'd have
nowhere to go. It seemed doubtful that proud lord would allow her to stay, title or no title. In fact,
Scratha would likely be furious at the move to make her a desert lord and place her in charge of Scratha
Fortress. He might even call her out, to end in blood the possibility of another claimant for his place.
No matter which way she looked, death seemed to be waiting, and betrayal by everyone she'd ever
trusted. She'd been anidiot to agree to Oruen's request. Why had he put her in this position? Whatdid he
want from her? She shut her eyes, nauseated.
“Gods only know,” she said, and meant it; she had no better answer to give the waiting silence. “I'll deal
with that day when it comes.”
“Is this man who sent you here worth dying for?”
Alyea thought about when she'd first met Oruen. He'd been tall and gangly, thin and awkward, nothing to
look twice at physically. He'd skirted the fringes of court life, only attending when it would have been
suicidal to be seen absent.
He'd haunted the beaches of Bright Bay, stopping to pick up shells like any scruffy beachcomber,
examining them carefully and setting them back down. Sometimes he threw them out into the ocean,
hard, as far as they would go, or skipped flat rocks against the waves.
She'd watched him from hiding, drawn by some bitter intensity in his actions, and finally one day openly
positioned herself where she knew he'd pass by on his daily ramblings. She'd been twelve at the time, he
almost twice that. He'd walked by with barely a nod to her; she'd scrambled to her feet and taken up a
place by his side.
He hadn't objected, hadn't said anything, and they had walked in silence for over an hour. She'd met him
again the next day, and the next, and slowly they'd started to talk, far away and safe from the s'iopes and
the horror of daily life.
She'd been sixteen when Oruen took her to bed, the one and only time. She always saidseduced
afterwards, but the reality was much more desperate, a day of unrivaled horror leading to a mutual need
for comfort, which unfolded into the inevitable.

Page 174

He'd never referred to it afterward, never approached her again; and after a few fumbling attempts of her
own had been rebuffed kindly but unmistakably, she'd let the friendship resume with some distance to it.
When Pieas cornered her one night, she hadn't told anyone. She'd pushed aside Oruen's questions about
the bruises. She'd been afraid to bridge that distance, afraid of collapsing into his arms only for him to
gently, quietly push her back with the same emotionless words he'd used before.
And now he'd gained the throne, and his return for all her help and her one-time warming of his bed had
been a permanent apartment in the palace and the raising of her family back into favored status. She
wasn't his concubine, nor one of his advisors. He called her a friend and allowed her to quietly visit him
any time she felt the need to talk, and he still claimed to respect her judgment and observations. But she'd
gained nothing significant for the risks she'd taken on his behalf. Not until he chose her, out of a court of
highly qualified diplomats, to step into what she now saw as the most politically dangerous situation he'd
faced in the six months he had been on the throne.
Why her? The question kept coming back. Why pick an inexperienced, relatively ignorant girl, and send
her with an advisor reluctant to give out crucial information? Had he intended for her to fail? If so, if not .
. . was Oruen worth dying for?
She breathed in through her nose, let the air out in a hard sigh. “Once upon a time, I would have said yes
without question. He's a good man. Now . . . I don't know.”
“Is your purpose worth dying for?”
Opening her mouth to sayyes , she found herself shocked at the words that came out instead: “Nothingis
worth dying for. You can't help anyone or anything if you're dead.”
Wincing, Alyea shut her eyes, waiting. What she had said went against everything she had ever been
taught, ever seen lived, ever believed before. But it felt like truth: a raw, harsh truth filled with anger at
endless violence and pointless sacrifice. Too many men had marched to the palace to beg, to plead, to
threaten and cajole for the return of their wives and families; their reward had been a chance to entertain
Ninnic before their own deaths. Too many women had thrown themselves in front of their children, trying
to protect them, only to be killed and the children taken anyway.
Honorable self-sacrifice be damned to the s'iopes' hells; it never achieved anything.
The ishrait finally spoke. “Stand.”
Alyea rose slowly, massaging cramps out of her legs; the cold of the stone seemed to have seeped
through the blanket and into her joints. The women on the benches were turning, facing her now, their
faces still shadowed beneath their deep hoods.
“The test of Comos is the test of the ego,” the ishrait said, her rich voice rolling through the room. “It asks
you to set aside your own fear, your own needs, for the sake of those you protect. The test of Ishrai is
the test of life. It asks you to weigh the value of living. A desert lord's life is a sacred trust and must be
treated with the greatest respect. A desert lord's death weakens the entire world. The desert is harsh,
and life is not fair; a reckless leader would quickly be killed and leave his people unprotected. That is
why a full desert lord must have the approval of Ishrai.”
Alyea swallowed, daring to hope that she'd pulled it off after all.

Page 175

“You have passed this part of the test of Ishrai,” the woman said. “Taishell te s'a-lalien; sisters, the
supplicant is closed to you now. You may go.”
The women stood in a ragged wave, bowed deeply in Alyea's direction, and filed silently out of the room.
The clicking of the bead curtain swaying back into place went on for quite some time as the ishrait moved
around the room, extinguishing oil lamps until only one remained lit. She picked it up and came to stand in
front of Alyea. In the tiny island of light surrounding them, the woman's face seemed drawn and worried.
“Now comes the hard part, Alyea,” she said. “Sit back down, please.”
The tall woman sat down on the floor in front of Alyea, seeming not to mind the cold stone; set the oil
lamp between them and shut her eyes. She looked as if she were gathering strength for a supremely
difficult task.
“Women do not usually become desert lords,” the ishrait said. “Let me assure you it has nothing to do
with gender bias. There's a very harsh reality involved. I know that Juric told you he believed you could
do this; I wish I could agree. If you had the full year to study with us, I believe you might pass, but this. . .
.”
She blew out air through her nose in a hard sigh of her own, seeming frustrated, and directed another
worried glance at the dark pool.
“Alyea, I'll be honest. I hoped you would fail the questioning. That would have been safer for all of us.”
Alyea felt the chill of the stone reaching up her spine.
“I'm committed now,” she said, hearing a brittle edge in her own voice. “Stop trying to scare me out of
it.”
The ishrait smiled, a brief flash of pale teeth in a shadow-lined face. “All right. Let me tell you a story,
then. Be silent, and listen.” She leaned forward, extinguished the last lamp, and began to speak, a
disembodied voice in complete darkness:
In the beginning days of the world, there was born light, and there was born dark. There was dry, and
there was wet. There was warm, and there was cold. Then there came life, with death close behind. And
life took many forms, but death could take only one.
One form of life developed which could think, and knew itself, and considered future and past and
present as separate concepts. And that life grew, and claimed dominion over all creatures, and built a
great city, and another, and another.
That life was not human.
Alyea opened her eyes and stared into the darkness, wishing she could see the ishrait's face.
Their cities did not satisfy them. They fought, and argued over small things, and lost their way, and
became deeply divided, and at last parted ways. Some stayed above ground, others fled on the wind,
and others dug deep to find the secrets of the world, hiding underground as they sought for knowledge.
After a long time, the seekers desired to reconcile with their estranged brethren, and emerged from the
deep and the still places of the world.
But the cities were gone. All traces of the ones they had left behind were gone, without a trace. No ruins;

Page 176

no signs of battle; nothing. Their people were simply gone, as if they had never been.
Alyea made herself swallow in a dry throat. Her eyes were starting to hurt; she realized she'd been
straining them wide, staring into the darkness as if she could force herself to see the ishrait's face. She
shut her eyes and rubbed her eyelids lightly with her fingertips.
The remaining seekers were few and mostly old by that time. They had not given much thought to
children, while they sought their knowledge; they had been secure in their certainty that more of their kind
existed to carry on the line. Now that security faltered, and they found themselves alone.
But they discovered that while they studied the deep and the still places of the world, another life had
moved to fill the quiet place left by their lost brethren. This life thought, and knew itself, and considered
past and present and future to be separate concepts.
This life was human.
Alyea swallowed again, blinking. She had a dozen questions by now, but knew better than to speak. The
air felt dry and cold in her throat, and her skin chill-prickled.
This is the teaching of Ishrai. This is the secret lore we hold. Callen of Ishrai and the desert lords alone
know this tale. You will never repeat it.
Alyea found herself nodding obediently.
The humans and the people of the world met, the ishrait said, and Alyea wondered if she were speaking
at all. The breathing in front of her seemed steady and undisturbed by words. She put the thought aside
as irrelevant to the moment and focused on listening.
The humans and the people of the world agreed to live together, for mutual benefit, for mutual survival.
The humans gave the people of the world a name they could pronounce: ha'reye for many, ha'rethe for
one. And that suited the people of the world well enough.
And they discovered that with the right circumstances, they could have children together.
Alyea opened her mouth, caught herself just in time; put a hand over her mouth to make sure she stayed
silent.
A pact was made between humans and the ha'reye, for mutual benefit, for mutual survival. The people of
the world promised to use the secrets they had learned to make sure the humans had water that did not
drown the land, winds that did not blow everything away, and a sun that did not scorch the land. The
humans. . . .
Alyea listened to the silence for a while before realizing the ishrait wanted her to complete the last
sentence.
“The humans provided them with children,” she said softly.
The humans gave of themselves, the ishrait agreed.The humans gave, once every year, one of their finest
young men or women. Those chosen to serve stayed with the ha'reye for one year, and gave the people
of the world a single child of mixed blood, called a ha'ra'ha, and then returned to their families unharmed.
Unhurt, but different; and they never spoke of what had happened during that year.

Page 177

Over time, this caused fear and doubt. The ones who served were affected in different ways, and
sometimes frightened their communities. After a time, some places rebelled, and refused to serve when
chosen, and said they would not be bound to the people of the world. They broke away, heedless of
disgrace or duty. But others remained true, and wanted to study more closely with the ha'reye, and learn
their secrets.
“The Split,” Alyea said involuntarily, then clamped her hand back over her mouth and bit her lower lip.
The Split, the ishrait agreed evenly.Some humans went south, to the deep jungles, to study with the
ha'reye. The remaining humans broke their agreement with the people of the world, and held back their
young. And the ha'reye waited a hundred years for the humans to change their ways and understand their
error. But humans, not understanding, thought they had won, and moved on, and forgot.
The ha'reye, seeing that humans had no intention of returning to their pact, came out of their deep and still
places, and took the hundred young that they were due for the past hundred years. And then they left that
area. The water sank deep into the ground, and the wind moved the earth from place to place to place,
and the sun scorched the land. Great farms became desert, and lovely places became barren. And the
humans searched for a cause, and found none; and a few among them who studied the old ways called
for the ha'reye to forgive them, and found silence.
Ha'reye do not forget as quickly as a human does, and they do not forgive as easily as a human will.
Alyea felt herself nodding in time to the steady beat of the words, almost swaying in place, and shook
herself sharply back to alertness.
Humans sought their kin in the jungles to the south, and found the way closed. They tried to travel the
seas, to find a new land where they might survive, and found the way closed. They tried to move into the
northlands, and found the way closed. And people began to die from too much sun, and too much wind,
and too little water.
And then a strange thing happened.
A single human, a young man who had studied the old lore and listened to the old stories all his life,
walked into the deepest places of the desert, where the children had once been given, and offered
himself.
He sat in the hot sun and let it scorch him. He sat in the rains and let them soak him. He sat while the
wind blew fierce and wild around him, and did not move. And he called out over and over and over for
the ha'reye to hear him, to take him as an offering under the old ways, to forgive humans for breaking the
pact.
The ha'reye heard and were amazed. They answered, and lifted him from the hot sands, and eased his
burned flesh, and accepted him as an offering under the old ways. But they did not forgive all humans for
breaking the pact, and they did not restore the southlands to their former glory.
After the allotted year of service was up, they released him to spread the word that if humans would
return to the pact for as many years as they had left it broken, the east and the west and the north would
be opened, but the southern jungles would stay closed forever, and should now be known as the
Forbidden Jungles. Many people laughed at him, and said the desert had driven him mad; but some
listened, and followed him, and kept the pact. And the pact was honored for a hundred and fifty years,
and the east and the west and the north opened, but the Forbidden Jungles stayed closed. Those who

Page 178

had not believed went to the east and to the west and to the north, but those who believed stayed behind,
and those who agreed to serve came to be called lords of the desert. They were avoided and feared
more than they were respected, but kept the pact nonetheless. And those lords had families, and they
chose to live in the deep places of the desert, and choose from their families who would keep the pact
with the ha'reye.
It soon became clear the choices were not blind enough; even a desert lord can make mistakes when it
involves the intelligence or suitability of his own offspring. So the followers of the wind-lord Comos, the
water-maiden Ishrai, and the sun-lord Datda were given the responsibility of testing those who wished to
honor the pact.
Over the years and through the miles, humans have once again forgotten, but never the desert lords. On
the faith of the desert lords rests the survival not only of the southlands, but the world; and they never,
ever forget that.
Silence filled the darkness. Sensing that the ishrait had finished her story, Alyea lifted a trembling hand to
her face and discovered the dampness of tears.
“Good gods,” she said at last, shakily.
“It's a long story,” the ishrait said quietly, her voice echoing in the empty room, “but you need to
understand it. Any questions?”
The words came out without conscious direction: “Has the king gone through the blood trials?”
“Once, that was a requirement,” the ishrait said. “It fell aside with the years and the fading of memory into
myth, and the chaos of recent years hasn't helped. No, the desert lords may call him 'lord' now, but it's an
empty title. Oruen seems better than the recent line, but he'll never be allowed to take the trials. He
knows just enough to understand that, and to have a small idea of what that means.”
“And so he sent me,” Alyea said, pieces beginning to fit together at last. “To become his tame desert
lord.”
“A desert lord serves no man,” the ishrait said. “There is no such thing as a tame desert lord. Oruen's
understanding is limited, and he makes a grave error with this.”
“I'm beginning to see that,” Alyea agreed ruefully. “Why have I been allowed to come this far?”
“Because you have the backing of a thass.”
She almost said,who? But names weren't used here. “Why is this thass so important?”
“Think of all you have heard, Alyea,” the woman said. “There is only one thing we would bow to in this
situation. What is it?”
In the quiet, Alyea's pulse seemed to thud along her temples. “The ha'reye?”
“Or theha'ra'hain , their mixed-blood descendants. Some few, very few, choose to make their way in the
world of the humans, rather than stay in the deep places with the people of the world. Your thass is a
ha'ra'ha who has chosen to stay with the humans. He is a very rare and important man among us, Alyea;
and he favors you.”

Page 179

The room seemed warmer now, the stone under the blanket less chill; Alyea drew a deep breath and
found herself breathing moist air again. She froze, not sure when the change had occurred, and
unreasonably terrified by it.
“What does that mean?” she asked, unable to keep her voice steady. “That he favors me? What am I
supposed to do about it?”
A heavy sigh came from the darkness in front of her.
“There is a price for everything,” the ishrait said. “You cannot avoid the duty of a desert lord if you want
your title to have any weight. You must give a child, and you must spend time learning your new way. But
this rather peculiar situation demands your presence in the world much sooner than a year. This ha'ra'ha
has proposed and been granted a remarkable exception to the one-year rule. After all the blood trials are
complete, assuming you survive them all, he has offered to serve as your teacher. He will be as your lord
and master until he is satisfied that you are ready to stand on your own.”
The mist seemed to be condensing onto Alyea's bare skin. Not an unpleasant sensation, but still an eerie
one; she resisted the urge to wipe the dampness away.
How could she hold a desert fortress and be involved in delicate political arrangements while under
orders from some stranger? Impossible. Alyea shut her eyes and tried to swallow again. This wasn't what
she had expected.
“What if I choose to spend the full year with . . . with the people of the world, the ha'reye, instead?” she
asked.
“It's too late for that,” the woman said, sounding sad. “The agreement is made and the questions are
ended. My part in this is done.Taishell , ha'reye; she is open to you now. Gods hold you, child.
Goodbye.”
“Wait—”
As she spoke, she realized that the dampness on her skin wasn't condensation, but a thick layer of some
unknown fluid. With a wild eddy of warm air, a surge of the same liquid flowed up her back. It slid
around to the front of her body, surrounding her so quickly she barely had time to gasp in reaction before
she felt herself being lifted, rolled, and pulled in one long smooth movement beneath the surface of the
pool.

Chapter Seventeen
They left town as the sky began to grey; not on horses, as Idisio had assumed, but walking, with a pack
mule trudging beside them. The wide path up the slope he'd seen from the ship turned out to be gigantic
steps, cut wide enough for two laden mules to pass each other comfortably. While the steps were
shallow, the slope tended to be steep; within a short time his calves ached. He ignored it, brooding over
what Scratha had told him the night before.

Page 180

The desert lord had told a long story in the cadences of a bard; Idisio had been carried away by that
smooth recital. The meeting of ha'reye and human, the Agreement reached after much negotiation, the
resulting children; it all whirled together in his head. He'd had little sleep and felt thoroughly gritty-eyed as
he trudged up the steps, leading the mule.
Early morning quiet didn't help his drowsiness. Their mule clopped steadily up, and others clopped
placidly down. Nobody seemed in a hurry to get to the top or the bottom, and nobody rode. The steady
rhythm sounded almost like a lullaby. Idisio blinked hard against the urge to fall asleep on his feet; no rail
protected travelers against the increasingly long drop to the jagged ground below.
Every so often, a wider space in the trail allowed people to move out of the way of those behind, and
take a rest or a meal or a piss; Idisio saw all three in a short time. His thoughts had him so distracted he
didn't even blink at the last, didn't find it at all odd, just gave it a blank incurious glance and kept trudging.
As the sun warmed the air, Riss began to chatter: asking Scratha questions, laughing, being foolish.
Realizing that his lord was answering patiently and even gently, Idisio shook out of his brooding to listen.
“Three,” Scratha said. “Three gods, three trials, three marks. I bear all three. Full lords don't show them
casually; they're sacred. Even telling you how many marks, how many trials, isn't something most would
do.”
“We're lucky,” Riss said, and it didn't sound at all sardonic.
Scratha made a neutral noise and went on: “There's a . . . a ranking system, thethio , in the desert.
Someone with Yuer's background and birth . . . I can understand his bitterness. He always wanted to be
a desert lord, but even the Aerthraim wouldn't stretch that far, and they'll accept people into their family
that no other desert family would touch.”
“Why did Yuer leave the southlands?” Riss said.
“He was essentially banished,” the noble said. “He'd given certain young ladies of station some . . .
difficulty.”
“Rape?” Riss said. Her voice trembled.
“No,” Scratha said. “That would have gotten him a much more severe punishment. No, Yuer had a
tendency to get drunk and say excessively rude things to nobles, especially women. He became such a
disgrace that his case came before a Conclave. Everyone agreed that sending him to the northlands
would be best; there would be less temptation for his outbursts. He seems to have gained some
self-control, at least. Control enough to undercut a two-hundred-year-old agreement between desert and
kingdom,” he added. “I still want to know how that happened.”
They walked in silence for a while.
“Where's Red?” Idisio said suddenly.
Riss laughed. “You don't listen so well, do you? We've already been over that.”
“I was thinking about something else,” Idisio said.
“I told the sailor where to look and who to speak to,” Scratha said, cutting Riss short as she began to say
something. “I gave him the words to use and a letter giving him my support. What he finds or doesn't find
is up to him now. That's as far as I could go, Idisio. He's no longer our concern.”

Page 181

“Thank you, my lord,” he said, and meant it wholeheartedly.
Scratha nodded without replying.
“Oh, don't be mean,” Riss said a few moments later and grinned at Idisio. “Your lord's not telling you that
he asked the sailor to send word if he found his answers.”
Idisio shot a startled glance at Scratha; the man smiled, gaze still straight ahead.
“True,” he said. “I'll admit I'd like to know, myself. I feel that there's something important about the boy,
and I've always gone with my hunches.” He slanted a quick look at Idisio.
“So have I,” Idisio said, and felt a new energy come into his step.

The journey to the top of the Wall took two full days of climbing, with no inn along the way. Halfway up
they came to a plateau where exhausted travelers could collapse; aching all over, Idisio promptly did so,
heedless of being stepped on or over by man or beast.
At the end of the second day of climbing, they crested the final turn of stair to level ground. The ground
wasn't the pure sand Idisio had expected, but a hard, cracked mixture of pebbly dirt strewn across an
uneven surface. A long building, flung wide and low across the ground and more window than wall, sat
on a rare platform of solid rock. Out front stood a brightly painted sign, taller than Idisio and wider than
he could stretch his arms, marked with a simple line drawing of a man climbing steep stairs. The
awkward lettering read

TOP OF THHE WAL IN ANN TAVARNN
In the distance, a rough spire of wind-scoured rock hunched against the gathering dark. Idisio stopped,
staring at it; something seemed both menacing and familiar about the formation. Before he could place
what bothered him about the distant rock, Scratha prodded his shoulder and Riss his back, and he
stumbled on with them, tangling up his feet momentarily. The challenge of keeping his balance without
catapulting into the ground distracted him as they climbed a low stair to a raised courtyard, where
waist-high stone walls flanked by tall greenery blocked his view of the outside.
As they passed through the inn's wide courtyard, Idisio glanced up: feathery tops of sand-grass and
desert bamboo nodded together high overhead, forming a screen against daytime sun. This late in the
evening, with the sun already a low shimmer against the western horizon, chunky stone lanterns were
being lit.
Nobody spoke as they walked through the striations of afternoon shade turning into evening shadow.
Riss had been subdued for some time, but Idisio didn't think it came from the long climb. Something else
seemed to be troubling her, but exhaustion stopped him from asking questions.
Beyond the courtyard lay a wide room with a scattering of low, desert-style tables. Red and blue sitting
cushions leaned in tall piles against the walls, some still bright and new-looking, but most faded and worn.

Page 182

A wide, waist-high table at the far end of the room looked to be covered with plates of food.
Scratha steered them to the nearest stack of cushions. “Take one and follow me,” he said, lifting a faded
red pillow and turning away.
Idisio suspected he would have charged over a bed of hot rocks for a promise of sitting down at the end,
and Riss probably would have been trying to knock him out of her way. Even Scratha moved more
slowly than usual.
Scratha settled on his cushion, waited until they were all seated, and said, “Customs differ here. Before
we move another step, there are a few things we need to settle. First of all: Idisio. You're my servant.
Servant to a desert lord means you have status.”
“Thio,” Idisio said.
“Good. You have been listening. Yes, you have thio. If I send you on an errand, whether that be fetching
water or carrying a message or bedding a woman, you do it. You don't question. And if someone gets in
your way, you tell them I sent you and to argue it with me.”
Idisio stared at his lord. “Bedding a woman?” he said in disbelief.
Scratha's expression held no humor. “It's been known to happen,” he said. “Politics, Idisio. It's not a nice
world you've put yourself into.” His manner softened. “I won't ask that of you. But I've known other
lords to order that, and more. Watch yourself. You're probably in more danger than I am, here. Nobody
will attack me directly, but you're both vulnerable. And ignorant.”
He paused. “I didn't want to bring either of you along, remember. I was willing to risk Idisio because he's
quick on his feet and with his wits. But you wouldn't listen, and I could see Idisio didn't want to leave you
behind.”
The last comment was obviously directed at Riss. She shot Idisio a startled glance. He felt his face turning
a deep crimson and tried desperately to think of something that would change his expression to a cool
aloofness.
“That's another thing,” Scratha went on before they could speak. “Honesty. I'll tell you this right now: by
all the gods donot try to lie to anyone here. You don't know who's a desert lord, who's a ha'ra'ha, who's
trained in aqeyva. Best to say nothing but truth, and as little of that as you can. Believe me, if I catch
either of you in even a small lie here, I'll thrash you bloody myself.”
Embarrassment gave way to fear: Idisio stared into his lord's dark, dark stare and had absolutely no
doubt of Scratha's deadly sincerity.
“Riss is going to have to be my servant as well, for the time being,” Scratha went on. “She needs the
status. You're going to have to get along, Idisio. No more childish sniping and pride contests. On either
side,” he added, shooting an equally intense glance at Riss, who had been starting to smile.
Her smile slid away. “Yes, my lord,” she said meekly.
“If you're going to accept being my servant,” he said, “you have to accept that youwill obey every single
one of my commands, no matter how distasteful you may find them. Is that a problem?”
“I'm not walking back down that bloody stair,” Idisio said, surprising himself. He bit his lip but met his

Page 183

lord's gaze steadily.
“Good,” Scratha said, and looked back at Riss.
“I'll obey, my lord,” Riss said.
Scratha nodded. “There's a truth for you to tell, Riss,” he said. “One you've been avoiding. It's time for
Idisio to know.”
Riss opened her mouth, seeming about to protest.
“That's an order. Resolve it before we move on.” He met her glare, steady and grim, until she retreated
to studying the table again. “There's always the option of leaving,” he added. “But if you go, there's only
one path: back down the Wall. I won't have either of you wandering loose up here.”
He sighed. “Plates are on the food table. Help yourselves. I'll pay when we're done eating.” He stood in
a graceful unfolding of long legs and stalked away.
In the long, awkward silence that followed, Idisio felt like scrambling to his feet and diving for the food as
a distraction, but he didn't want to be the first to move. Riss seemed similarly frozen in place.
“Oh, hells,” she said at last. “Idisio, look at me.”
Her tone suggested a willingness to wrench his neck permanently upright if he didn't do as ordered. He
met her steady stare, doing his best not to flinch or look away.
“What do you know about dasta, Idisio?”
He shook his head. “Not much. I know it's some sort of . . . I mean, I've heard it's used for, uhm, for. . .
.” He fumbled to find words that weren't too embarrassing, and failed.
“It's a highly addictive aphrodisiac,” Riss said bluntly. “Southern whorehouses use it to make sure their
women are docile. There are boys in the trade, too.”
“I know,” Idisio said. A wave of dizziness and a sense of screaming rage swept over him briefly; then it
passed. He blinked and focused on Riss again. She didn't seem to have noticed anything.
“Karic fed me dasta about once a week for over a year,” she said. Her lips tightened. “I never realized
until I overheard him talking that night. I'd never heard of dasta before.” She cleared her throat and
looked away. “I realized pretty fast I was addicted.”
“I gathered as much,” he said.
Her expression became fierce. “It's anaphrodisiac addiction,” she said, almost snarling. “One of the things
you want when the craving hits is sex, because that's always been part of the experience, and you think
that can stop the hurt of not having the drug.”
He stared at her, at a loss for words.
“Lord Scratha explained all that, one night when you were asleep early, and asked what I wanted to do.
He said I could bed him if I needed to, or you if you'd agree; I didn't want another man to touch me just
then. He said he understood and that he'd do what he could to help me without that.” She spoke rapidly

Page 184

now, as if trying to get it over with.
Idisio's jaw loosened. He opened and shut his mouth like a landed fish several times, conflicting thoughts
and emotions rushing through him.
“He said you could take me to bed? Oh, gods,” he added instantly, utterly mortified, and covered his
face with both hands. “I'm sorry, Riss, I didn't mean to say that. Oh, gods.”
To his surprise, she laughed. Not a joyful laugh; more a weary acknowledgment of a painful truth. “Yes.
And I thought about it. But I was so hurt and so angry . . . that just wasn't an option. Just explaining it all
to you was more than I could handle. That's why I spent so much time in my cabin, on the ship. I still . . .
I still crave. . . .” She stopped, cleared her throat. “But I can handle it now.” Her stare dared him to
question that statement.
“Yeah,” Idisio said, numb. She'd thought about going to bed with him? He spoke to cover the awkward
silence, and made it worse: “Well, that's all right.”
He dropped his face back into the safe darkness of his palms for a moment, feeling like the world's
biggest idiot, then made himself look up and face her.
“I meant. . . .” He fumbled for words, and quickly gave up. “Sorry.”
Her grin had more real humor in it this time. “I understand,” she said, and looked away, giving him a
chance to recover. “Looks like Lord Scratha found some other people to talk to.”
Idisio looked across the room. Scratha had settled at a table with three other men, all dressed in desert
robes, dark and hawk-faced.
“Giving us time to talk it out,” Idisio said.
“Really,” Riss said, deadpan; he shot her a startled glance and she grinned. She stood. “Let's go get
some food.”
Idisio jumped at that suggestion; it gave him something to do with his hands besides twisting them
nervously and something to do with his mouth other than gape. They filled their plates and applied
themselves to their food in silence. Idisio was chewing over more than the food on his plate, and had
nothing to say until he'd sorted it all out. Riss had an almost serene expression on her face, as if she'd said
everything that needed saying and felt content to leave it at that.
“Honesty,” he said at last, tentatively. She glanced at him. Idisio poked at a ball of rice until it fell apart,
revealing a strange grey paste inside. “It's not easy.”
He fell silent again, not sure how to present his own truth, but knowing he needed to.
“I think that's calledquba ,” Riss said quietly, pointing at the dismantled rice ball. “It's a paste made from
cactus peppers.” She picked one up from her own plate and popped it into her mouth.
“I've been. . . .” Idisio started, and took refuge from speech with a bite of the quba.
A moment later he began coughing, his mouth and throat on fire. Riss reached across the table, lifted his
goblet, and pressed it on him. He gulped at it gratefully. The liquid tasted like a strong, warm tea; in other

Page 185

circumstances Idisio would have called it bland. At the moment it tasted wonderful.
“I grew up on the streets,” he said once he had his breath back, and told the rest in a rush, before he
could lose his courage. He used as few words as he could and left out the most humiliating parts; still,
Riss looked horrified by the time he finished.
“I'm sorry, Idisio,” she said. “I've been thinking you wouldn't understand what I went through.”
“Not the dasta,” he said. “I never had to deal with that. But the . . . what they did . . . yeah. I have some
idea.” He took another bite of the rice, more carefully this time, and washed it down with a sip of tea.
“That's why you were so fierce about that sailor's child,” Riss said. “Wanting to save him from life on the
streets, if that's where he is.”
Idisio started to nod, and the dizziness came back, a distant humming in his ears and a shrill howl of fury.
His vision greyed for a moment, and he had to blink hard and rub his eyes to focus again.
Riss' stare had turned sharp and thoughtful.
“I'm just tired,” Idisio said, offering a tight smile. Judging from the twitch of her mouth, she didn't believe
him, but she let it go. They went back to eating in silence.
Their plates were empty by the time Scratha returned to their table. He stood over them, looking down,
and said, “I've arranged lodging for the night. If you're done eating, let's go.”
As Idisio stood, aches and stiffness from the long climb made themselves known. He rolled his head in an
attempt to loosen the muscles and dropped into a deep leg stretch when his calves started to cramp. He
straightened to find them watching him with amusement.
“You looked awfully silly,” Riss said. “I thought you were having some sort of seizure for a moment.”
He shrugged, refusing to apologize, and followed them out of the room. Scratha steered them through a
different doorway than the one through which they'd entered; it led to a long hallway with wide, arched
openings on one side that let in air and sunlight. Doors were spaced along the solid wall. Scratha stopped
at the third door and touched the surface with his fingers.
“Servant quarters,” he said, then pointed to the next door. “My quarters. There's a connecting door if
you need me. I'd advise not wandering around alone. Get some rest. We've a long way to go tomorrow,
and you'll need your wits.”
He walked away. Idisio stared after him dumbly, took a half-step to follow, and stopped again. Scratha
opened the next door and stepped into the room without looking back. His door shut.
“Oh, for the love of the gods,” Riss said. She opened their door, put a hand in the small of Idisio's back,
and propelled him inside. The room smelled of sharp and bitter things Idisio had no name for, but seemed
clean.
“Bitewood and pepper,” Riss noted, sniffing, and looked pleased. “There won't be any bugs here.”
Idisio grinned, startled at that bit of domesticity from Riss of all people.
“What?” she said, catching his expression. “Stables need to stay free of bugs too, you know.”

Page 186

Floor to ceiling, brightly colored silk hangings covered the walls; Idisio guessed the connecting door to
Scratha's room lay behind one of the draperies, but didn't bother looking for it. Four wide, thick cushions
lay on the floor, each one easily large enough to serve as a mattress for a man Scratha's size.
The other furnishings took up almost all the remaining space in the small room: a low desk with a kneeling
pad, a washbasin, and a chamber pot. A wide window covered by a light curtain of woven reeds
allowed the vague evening breeze to drift through the room.
Idisio sat on one of the cushions, determined to act casual and relaxed. Riss lifted one cushion on top of
another, then pointed at him.
“Lie face down,” she said, moving her hand to indicate the cushions.
“Huh?”
“You're stiff and sore,” she said. “We both are. You first. I'll work you loose.”
“Uh,” he said, his calm act completely shattered.
“Come on, I won't bite. I promise. Lie down.”
Idisio cast an assessing look at Riss' expression and obeyed; at least he would befacedown.
Riss's fingers dug into his back with surprising strength.
“Working around horses,” she said as she kneaded and rubbed, finding every sore spot and stiff area,
“you learn about keeping them fit and moving easily. No great stretch to move that to people.”
“Great,” Idisio said, the words muffled by fabric, “now I'm a horse.”
Riss made a whinnying sound, and they started laughing.
By the time Riss finished working his back and legs, Idisio was grinning like an idiot. He'd never expected
to feel so comfortable around a girl, let alone this one, but Riss kept up a steady stream of banter,
encouraging him to join in.
Riss insisted on explaining what she was doing so that he could rub her down next, but when that moment
came, Idisio found himself too terrified to lift a hand. She made a disgusted noise, pushed the mats apart,
then stretched out, pulling a light blanket over herself without a word. “I'm sorry,” Idisio said lamely.
After a moment, she sat up and looked at him.
“I'm not really mad,” she said. “I guess I should take it as a compliment, that you're afraid to touch me in
case you're overcome by lust.”
Idisio gaped, shaken and wordless at her bluntness.
“It's all right,” she said. “Go to sleep.” She leaned over and turned down the lamp. The darkness,
pressing in close and hot, silenced any more attempts to apologize; he found his bed mat and lay down
without another word.

Page 187

It took him a long, aching time to fall asleep.

Chapter Eighteen
In the darkness came a hard pressure that took away Alyea's breath; then, abruptly, a growing light and
a floating, empty feeling. She saw nothing around her, but felt surrounded by presence—one, many, she
had no way of telling. It was justpresence , stronger even than the ishrait's had been.
In a moment of clarity Alyea understood that the ishrait had to be a ha'ra'ha herself.
The light shifted and separated, forming pools and lines of not-light. Alyea stared at the abstract patterns
for some time, watching them move, join, split, and curve, feeling the open, idiot wonder of a child
learning the world for the first time.
At last she realized that the shadows and planes of light hinted at the definition of an actual, physical form.
Focusing more sharply, she saw the ha'rethe in front of her for one searing moment, and as the light
dropped steeply back into darkness, she screamed.
The floating, dreamy feeling returned, along with a sense of sadness that brought tears streaking down her
face.
You do not offer us acceptance , a voice said. So few humans offer us acceptance, despite all we give
your kind. What do you bring us, then? What is your gift to us?
Gift?She blinked hazily, trying to remember if the ishrait had said anything about a gift.
You must give something , the voice insisted.It is not sharing until both sides give. What is your offering?
“What do you want?”
We have been given many gifts, and none have asked that question.The voice sounded rather startled. It
fell silent for a time, as if thinking, then said,Tell us a story that means something to you.
“A story that means something to me?” She paused, remembering a story one of her nurses had told her
long ago. “All right. I'll tell you about Krilla.”
Drawing a deep breath, she began reciting, letting the cadence of the words take over her voice.
This is a story of a distant northern village, high in the Scarpane Mountains, the village of Alonir. Although
it is in the path of many of the worst winter storms, somehow most of them turn aside and leave the
village untouched. Old men and women of Alonir say this is because of Lord Krilla.
Krilla lived with her mother, father, and three sisters, in this village of Alonir. She was the youngest, no
more than sixteen, and very slight and homely. Her older sisters were attractive but vain, and their mother
desired to find them suitable, wealthy husbands. But the wealthy men lived in the foothills and plains

Page 188

below the Scarpane Mountains, and the family was too poor to travel so far.
The three sisters did not like to go outside. They protested that the harsh winter winds and freezing air
would ruin their looks and that they would never find good husbands without their beauty. Krilla's sisters
often complained about the weather and about their poverty, but Krilla loved the winter weather, loved
to dance with the wind and spin with the snowflakes. She felt more comfortable outdoors in the clean,
crisp air than in the stuffy little house filled with constant complaints and sighs.
But a winter came where the wind ran colder and stronger than ever before, and her mother forbade
Krilla to go outside for fear of being blown away or frozen to death.
She found the confinement intolerable, and as the days passed she became more and more upset at the
quarrels erupting around her. She had always spent so much of her time outdoors that she had not seen
how very depressed her sisters were over the weather, and it puzzled her.
“Why do you hate going outside?” she asked. “It's so beautiful out there.”
“It's too cold!” one sister cried.
“It's too windy!” cried another.
“It snows too much!” said the third.
Krilla shook her head, confused that her sisters could so hate the very things she loved.
“Well,” she said bravely, “What if these things stopped?”
Her sisters laughed at her.
“Foolish girl!” they said scornfully. “Only the Lord of Winter could stop the snow and wind from coming
to our village. What do any of us have that would persuade him to turn aside from this tiny place?”
“I do not know,” Krilla answered stoutly. “But I am willing to search him out and ask. What harm can it
do to ask?”
“Go ahead,” they said. “You won't make it beyond the village borders, the weather is so terrible. We'll
be waiting here. You won't go far.”
“I will!” Krilla declared, and catching up her coat and mittens, went out the door while her sisters kept
their mother distracted.
The weather was indeed terrible, but Krilla knew how to dance with the wind. So she slipped through the
blasts of freezing air with determination and went on. The snow fell thickly, but she knew how to whirl
through the strange and beautiful patterns of the snowfall. At the edge of the village, she paused, but did
not look back. Instead she looked at the very highest peak of the Scarpane range, where legend said the
Lord of Winter lived.
“I hope the legends are right,” she said to herself. “It will be a very long walk.”
The story of Krilla also ran very long, and Alyea had demanded the entire thing over and over, until she
could recite it herself. She had wandered around muttering parts of it to herself; that had inevitably led to

Page 189

the s'iopes finding out that her nurse was telling “forbidden folk tales” and sending her away. It had taken
years for Alyea to realize that “sent away” had been a polite euphemism:beaten to death for spreading
heresy would have been more truthful.
Just one more death to lay at the feet of the Northern Church. Alyea kept going, throwing the words into
the darkness, telling of the determined little girl walking up the mountain, trudging on without much rest or
food, driven by the urgency of her quest. At last Krilla reached the top:
She was very tired, but the sight of the huge cave opening drew her on, heart pounding with hope.
Approaching the mouth of the cavern, she called out, “Is this the home of the Lord of Winter?”
The echoes of her voice came back to her, and she began to lose hope. Then something moved in the
darkness of the cave.
“This ismyhome,” said a deep, gravelly voice. “The home of the Lord of Winter is on the next mountain
over.”
Krilla's legs gave out from under her, and she sat down and wept, the tears freezing on her face. “I'm so
tired,” she cried, “and I cannot walk that far, and have nowhere to rest. May I please rest here for a
while?”
“Hm!” said the voice, and “hm!” again. “Yes, come in and rest. I will give you shelter from the wind and
snow.”
Krilla was too tired to be wary. “Thank you very much,” she said, and went into the cave.
“Why do you seek the Lord of Winter?” inquired the voice. “Move to your right a little more, there is a
soft place for you to sleep on there.”
Krilla followed the directions, and found a pile of soft cloth to stretch out on. “I am going to ask him to
turn aside the winter storms from our village,” she replied.
“Hm!” said the voice. “Why?”
“My family is too poor to arrange good husbands for my sisters. If the storms turned aside, we could
earn enough to give them a proper dowry.”
“How do you feel about the weather?” asked the voice.
“I love it,” Krilla said. “I love to dance with the wind and play with the snowflakes.”
“But if the Lord of Winter agrees to turn the storms away from your village, you would not have those
things any longer.”
“I know,” Krilla said sadly. “But my family is more important.”
“Hm,” said the voice. “Sleep, human child. You are safe here tonight.”
Alyea drew a breath, paused for a moment to rest her throat, then told of Krilla waking to discover that
her host was an enormous white dragon, and that she had slept curled up on one of its huge forelegs.
Realizing that the dragon must be the Lord of Winter, the child fell to her knees and presented her

Page 190

request for the storms to be turned aside:
“What would you give for this request?” the Lord of Winter demanded, his eyes suddenly stern and cold.
“What price would you pay?”
“Anything,” Krilla said humbly. “I would pay any price for this boon.”
“Asking me to turn aside storms is not a light request,” the dragon warned. “It will carry a heavy price.”
Krilla swallowed back her fear and nodded. “I will pay it.”
The dragon considered her for a moment, then said, “I will tell you the price first, and let you decide
whether you still wish to pay it. You will stay with me for the winter—this one, and every one that you
wish to see the village spared from the storms. You will share my bed and do anything I ask of you while
you are with me. Are you still willing to pay the price?”
Krilla choked back a sob. “I am.”
A tear rolled down her face and struck the layer of snow on the floor, freezing instantly into a perfect
tear-shaped drop of ice.
The Lord of Winter reached out and gently picked up the tiny drop. “You are braver than many warriors.
Very well. I will turn the winter storms aside from the village of Alonir.”
Then he transformed himself, and became as a reptilian human, and took her to his bed. Two drops of
her first blood fell to the icy floor, and froze as had the tear; and the Lord of Winter put all three aside in
a small box.
Alyea paused for a moment and opened her eyes. It seemed that the darkness had eased a bit; she
thought she could see the faintest outlines of a massive form before her. She shut her eyes again and went
on, telling of Krilla's return to her family in the spring, of their disbelief and mocking. At last, stung by the
unrelenting laughter, Krilla showed her family the gems that had formed from the frozen drops of her tears
and blood, which the Lord of Winter had warned her to keep hidden:
Her family looked at the gems with wonder, and just as she thought they believed her at last, one sister
asked where she had found such beautiful gems, and the second sister said she must have stolen them,
and the third sister reached for the box, saying these would make a grand dowry. And Krilla's parents
stepped between, and took the box away, and said they would decide how the gems would be used, and
that Krilla had done well.
Krilla went to bed crying, and during the night her parents looked at the gems, and spoke together in low
voices, and formed a plan. When Krilla awoke the next morning, her parents told her that the rubies
would serve as dowries for two of her sisters, and the diamond as dowry for the eldest, and that Krilla
herself would go with the eldest of her sisters and serve as a handmaiden in a rich man's house. When she
protested that she must return to the Lord of Winter come the end of fall, her parents called her mad, and
demon-ridden, and shut her in her room.
Three suitable young men were found, one for each of the elder sisters, and engagements announced as
summer faded into fall. At last Krilla was taken from her room and readied for the journey down the
mountain. She had been told so many times during the spring and summer and fall that she was ill, that
she had imagined her meeting with the Lord of Winter, that she half-believed it herself.

Page 191

But the day before they were to leave, she found by chance where the box was kept, and in secret she
took one ruby back. And she remembered that the Lord of Winter had said that if she commanded it
aloud, the rubies would break and that would summon his aid; and she thought, “If I am deluded, if I was
ill, then nothing will happen.”
She took the ruby to the fireplace, set it on the stone hearth, and commanded, “Break, ruby!”
The ruby shattered, and the banked fire came alive again, and from the flames spoke the voice of the
Lord of Winter.
“Little one,” he said, “little human, do you call for my aid?”
Krilla became frightened, and said nothing.
“Little one,” said the Lord of Winter, “little human, my Krilla, why do you call for me?”
Krilla still said nothing, and backed away from the hearth.
“Little Krilla,” said the voice of the Lord of Winter one more time, and Krilla thought the voice sounded
angry now. “You have called, and I have answered, and now you are silent. One more time only I will
ask; why have you called me?”
Krilla ran away, and hid under her covers for the rest of the night. In the morning the fire was just a
banked fire again and there was no sign of the broken ruby; not the smallest shard remained. And Krilla
became truly ill, and could not be moved. She developed a strange wasting fever that stripped the weight
from her so that her bones showed against the skin.
“We cannot wait,” said her family, “we must go without her.”
And only the sister who could not marry because her dowry ruby had been destroyed stayed with Krilla.
She was the same one who had said Krilla must have stolen the gems, and she was so bitter and angry
over her loss that she did little to take care of her sister. The rest of the village tried. The priests of Alonir
and of all the nearby villages prayed over Krilla, and the herb-wives and leechdoctors used their wisdom,
but nothing helped.
At last in desperation they called for a healer from yet another village, a man of ill repute who was said
to serve the old gods of the deep south. And this healer came, and he looked at Krilla, and asked her to
tell him her story.
When she was done speaking, he said, “She speaks truth. She has seen the Lord of Winter, and made a
pact with him, and shared his bed; those gems are her tears and her blood, and it is your taking them that
has made her ill. These gems are a part of Krilla, and only she can safely handle them.”
The priests were angry, and they threw the healer from the house, and told him never to return. And
Krilla continued to get worse. The priests decided the gems were evil, and Krilla possessed by a demon;
and they sent a messenger hurrying to the village at the foot of the mountain, to return with the gems.
Although Krilla's parents protested, they did not dare gainsay the priests, and returned to Alonir, angry at
how Krilla had ruined their grand wedding plans. And when they returned, the priests seized the box and
tried to smash the gems.
But the rubies would not break, and the diamond would not break, and the priests prayed and cast

Page 192

exorcisms and at last demanded that Krilla break the gems herself, to be free of the evil.
Krilla could not rise from her bed by that time, and had no strength to resist their demands. When she
picked up the ruby and whispered, “Break,” it shattered into a million pieces instantly. And one of the
shards stuck in her hand, and a drop of her blood fell to the floor; and to everyone's amazement the drop
of blood hardened and became another ruby, larger than a man's fist. It was too hot to touch, and
seemed filled with an inner flame.
“Little one,” said the voice of the Lord of Winter from within the ruby, “little human, do you call for my
aid?”
Krilla tried to speak, but the priests moved too fast, and closed her mouth.
“Little human, my Krilla,” said the Lord of Winter, “why do you call me?”
But Krilla was held fast, and could not speak. And two of her tears fell on the floor, and to everyone's
amazement they became great shining diamonds, larger and finer than the first.
“Little Krilla, my Krilla,” said the Lord of Winter one more time, and this time his voice sounded very
sad. “You have called me, and I have answered, and you are silent. I ask you again: why have you called
me?”
Krilla could speak at last, because the priests, distracted by the diamonds, had loosened their hold on her
to reach for the shining gems; so she cried out, “Help me, my lord!”
The ruby grew and grew at those words, and became another form, a large form, one that nearly filled
the free space in the room, and took the shape of a dragon.
“I am here,” said the Lord of Winter, and two great golden eyes opened in the ruby shape. “What help
do you wish, my little human?”
Before Krilla could speak, her mother pushed forward and said, “She wishes to be free of you and your
foul bargain, monster! Begone!”
The Lord of Winter looked only at Krilla, and he said, “Is that what you want, my Krilla?”
And Krilla looked at the Lord of Winter, and he at her.
“If I break our bargain,” said Krilla, “will you still hold the storms aside?”
“No,” said the Lord of Winter.
“If I keep our pact,” said Krilla, “how long will you hold the storms aside from my village?”
“Until the end of our pact,” said the Lord of Winter.
“And how long will our pact last?” said Krilla.
“Until you die,” said the Lord of Winter.
“And when will that be?” asked Krilla.

Page 193

And the answer the Lord of Winter gave struck everyone silent with wonder, even the priests; and Krilla
said, “I will keep the pact, my lord; and I will stay with you not only in the winter, but the spring and
summer and fall as well.”
Alyea remembered that she always had interrupted her nurse at that point, asking, “What did the Lord of
Winter say? What did he say?”
Her nurse had shaken her head and said, “That part of the story cannot be told, child. Nobody knows.”
And no matter how often Alyea pestered her, the nurse gave the same answer.
“And why would you do that, my Krilla?” said the Lord of Winter.
“Because there is nothing left for me here,” said Krilla. “My family and my village will turn against me,
whatever I decide.”
“But why would you stay with me, my Krilla, instead of making your own way and allowing your village
to reap its own rewards?” said the Lord of Winter.
And the answer Krilla gave struck everyone as the wisest thing they had ever heard, and the diamond in
the box shattered, and melted, and vanished forever. But the two diamonds formed of her most recent
tears remained.
Alyea had started to interrupt again; her nurse had covered her mouth gently and said, “That answer
cannot be told either, child. Nobody knows. Perhaps one day you will find out for yourself, and bring the
rest of the tale to your children.”
The Lord of Winter smiled, and took her away; and she was never again seen in that village, and nobody
ever dared climb to the highest peak of the Scarpane Mountains to seek her out. But when the wild
winds screamed down the mountain, the worst of them passed around and over the village of Alonir; and
the village was blessed with great harvest in fall and healthy newborn animals in spring, and a calm
summer every year. And the villagers prospered, and set the two remaining diamonds in a carefully
guarded glass case, and never touched them for their own profit. And they banished all the s'iopes from
their village, and lived in great peace for many years.
Alyea hadreally liked that part. Even now it brought a wide grin to her face to say that line, although
those words had probably been what sealed her nurse's grim fate.
One day the guards cried out and summoned the village, for the two diamonds in the glass case had
shattered. And nobody could understand why, or what had happened. The healer from the next village
was called upon once again, and it took him many days to arrive, for he was very old by this time, and
near death. And he looked at the diamond shards, and handled them with great reverence, and blessed
them in a strange language. To the amazement of all, the pieces melted and disappeared completely.
They clamored for him to tell them what it meant, and the answer the healer gave was the most
astounding and joyous thing they had ever heard and they rejoiced. The villagers celebrated for many
days, and named Krilla the patron Lord of their village.
Alyea hadn't even tried to interrupt at that point. She knew what her nurse would say. The ending wound
through a series of thoroughly blasphemous statements that she'd loved hearing and even now enjoyed
repeating:

Page 194

So there are those in the north who quietly pray to Lord Krilla, and roadside shrines are dedicated to
her. The priests seek to tear them down, but the shrines reappear within days or weeks. The wiser
priests simply hold their notice aside and say nothing, while the foolish ones grow angry, blustering, and
wear themselves out on a thing that will never change. There are no shrines to Krilla in the south, for she
loves only the snowy lands, and will never stray from the Scarpane Mountains. But in the north, if one
prays to the Lord Krilla with an honest heart and the desire to help others, one may find help when it is
least expected.
Alyea drew a deep breath and opened her eyes. The darkness had lifted. She stood in a simple, pleasant
sitting room; a man sat in an easy chair, facing her. A wide fireplace had a blaze laid in, and the warmth
wrapped around her like a gentle blanket. Another comfortable chair stood a step to her right.
“Not exactly accurate,” said the man in the chair, frowning, and she trembled at the expression. “Please
sit. There's a throw if you're cold.”
She found herself in the chair, drawing a thick blanket around her, with no clear memory of having
moved.
“I admit you tell a story well, even if it was poorly chosen,” the man said. “I accept the gift.”
She stared at him blankly, unable to think of anything to say. His features wouldn't stay fixed in her mind;
he looked thin and hard, one moment, gentle and soft the next. A desert lord, a northern noble, a
comfortably padded well-off merchant; she couldn't quite pin what he looked like from moment to
moment. Somehow it didn't matter.
“That was an unfortunate choice of story,” he said. “Too many inaccuracies, for one thing.”
Remembering the shape outlined to her vision for a heartrending moment, she licked her lips, tested her
voice with a slight cough, and said, “Are you . . . dragons?”
“No,” the man said, his expression flickering into something distinctly ugly. “You have no word, no
concept that describes us well. We don't care for that story. As I said, an unfortunate choice of gift. But
it's accepted. Not all gifts are . . . pleasant.” He drew a breath, let it out, then stood and held out a hand.
“Come here. Time formy . . . gift. I'll give you those answers you wanted so badly.”
She was on her feet again, and standing close to him, before she knew she had moved. His hands
wrapped gently around her upper arms. After a moment of looking at her intently, he slid one hand up to
her shoulder and back down to cup her elbow lightly. The touch raised gooseflesh on her arm and a deep
shivering heat throughout her body.
His voice lowered to a compelling whisper, barely audible, speaking words in a strange language. Her
vision dimmed, or maybe the air hazed. She could see his eyes, dark and intense: and then that faded and
she felt the heat of his body pressing close. Darkness folded around them, and heat rose and spread
through her, wide and deep and wild.
There came pain, and joy, and then an infinite, eternal tenderness that at last overwhelmed her and pulled
her completely into oblivion. She heard voices in the darkness, echoes of herself long ago, asking:
What did Krilla say, nurse? What did she say that was so wise?
Nobody knows, dear . . . nobody knows.

Page 195

But then another voice spoke, a young, sad voice, and it said:
Because, my lord, my family and the villagers are not evil. Some are innocent, and follow wherever they
are led, without thought of their own; they do not deserve to be punished for simple foolishness. And
some in the village do nothing but lead where they want to go and give no thought to the well-being of
those who follow, and those people will earn their own end. But you led only where I asked to go, and
rescued me only when I asked. You have used no trickery, and asked only that I decide my way for
myself. You have more honor than any human I have ever met, and I will follow you for that until the end
of my days.
And there came a blinding, howling pain and a searing rush of ecstasy, tumbling on and around and
through each other; then the darkness came back and took it all away again.

What did the healer say, nurse? What did he say? Why did the diamonds break?
Nobody knows, dear . . . nobody knows.
Another voice spoke, an old, gentle, joyous voice, and it said:
A diamond born of tears is the hardest substance in the world. The first diamond, which broke when
Krilla chose to leave with the Lord of Winter, was the tear of sacrifice; she reclaimed that piece of her
spirit when she chose her path with full desire rather than from duty. The last two diamonds were born
from tears of pain and anger, and were broken by the most powerful emotion in the world: love. She has
come to love the Lord of Winter, to surrender her heart completely, and to utterly forgive those who
sought to harm her.
Alyea felt new life pushing its first, tentative feelers into the space around her. Tenderness, gratitude, and
love flowed through and around, inside and outside, weaving and wrapping and holding her, then rocked
her down into a deep silence again.

What did the Lord of Winter say, nurse? What did he say, that made Krilla decide to go with him?
Nobody knows, dear . . . nobody knows. Perhaps one day you'll be the one to find out, and bring us all
the answers.
Another voice spoke, rich and deep and loud and quiet all at once. It said:
If you stay with me to save your village, your life will be twice as long as the oldest of your kind. If you
stay with me because you wish to be by my side, your life will be four times that long. And if you grow to
love me with a true and open heart, your life will be as long as mine and you will be as a Lord yourself,
and your children will be Lords of the world, and their children. But never seek to deceive me, for I
know your heart more clearly and more surely than you do; and I ask of you only honesty, and will return

Page 196

you only truth.
Tenderness and gratitude swelled one more time; then regret and sadness wove into the silent song of
emotion. She felt a searing pain beyond pain, a ripping that seemed as if it would go on forever.
This time darkness came as a merciful release.

Feeling came back in slow fragments. A deep, steady pain seemed to have seeped into her very bones.
She felt a light cloth covering over her, a soft padding under her; warm air moved gently against her face.
She could smell desert thyme and rosemary mixed with a soothing, rich floral fragrance she couldn't
identify.
She lay with her eyes closed, with no particular impulse to do anything but rest. The pain sapped her
energy and strength; she wasn't sure she could move even if she wanted to. She felt a pressure across her
hips, stomach, and groin, as if a thick, weighted blanket were bound tightly around her; in that area alone
the pain seemed muted.
After a while, the air moved in a different pattern, and the scent of herbs and flowers mixed wth the acrid
tang of human skin and sweat. Almost human: the odors held a musky tinge which Alyea recognized now.
“Ishrait,” Alyea said without opening her eyes.
The woman said nothing, but Alyea sensed her settling nearby, within arm's reach to the left. The quiet
steadiness of her presence seemed to ease the aches spiraling through Alyea's body.
Alyea felt no pressure to speak further, and simply rested a while more, until the red-edged waves of
pain subsided to a deep discomfort.
“Ishrait,” she said finally, “why do I hurt?”
In a low, barely audible murmur, the woman answered: “You may call me Acana. You have earned the
right to know my name and use it as you like.”
“Acana,” Alyea said, feeling only a weary sort of patience, “Why do I hurt? What happened?”
“What do you remember?”
Alyea sorted through fragments of memory.
“The pool,” she said at last. “You had me stand in the dark, in front of the pool, and asked me a lot of
questions. And then . . . I think I must have fallen asleep, and had a dream. A nightmare, maybe. I can't
recall what it was about, not really.”
She had a sense of almost unendurable loss at not being able to remember the dream clearly. There had
been a girl, trudging up a mountain in the cold; and a great voice, speaking from an invisible source. At
one point, Alyea remembered, her own hands had been cupped in front of her and filled to overflowing
with crystal-clear rubies and diamonds. And something about that linked to a deep eroticism, and a
deeper pain, but she couldn't recall clearly why.

Page 197

Acana sighed. “No dream and no nightmare. But it may be a mercy you can't remember much of it.” Her
voice sounded very sad. “You have passed the blood trial of Ishrai, and have been given the mark. Your
only remaining obligation is to your ha'ra'ha, who will guide you through the following year.”If you
survive.
The last words sounded oddly blurred; Alyea had the distinct feeling she'd just overheard one of Acana's
thoughts. She didn't bother dismissing that as impossible. She'd accept a bluebird reciting poetry and
discussing philosophy right now, without a twitch.
She heard Acana rise, murmur something indistinct, and leave the room. Alyea kept her eyes closed,
feeling nothing but an overwhelming lassitude that denied any emotion, squashed any thought or reaction
or movement. Another scent, evocative of warm, cinnamon-laced sand, entered the room as Acana's
faded away, and at last a distant jolt of shock reached deeply enough to prompt a response. She knew
who had arrived, just by that smell; no doubt, no chance of mistake.
Random thoughts flashed through her head. Apparently, she'd completely failed at losing Deiq's interest
after all. She didn't understand how he'd gotten from Stass to wherever the Qisani stood so quickly.
Chac would be furious.
But none of that seemed to matter any more.
Alyea opened her eyes and managed to turn her head to the left, each tiny increment of movement feeling
slow and creaky. In the dim light of the few small oil lamps, he seemed to loom high and tall, impossibly
large, until she realized she lay on a low bed and the perspective was skewed.
“Greetings, my lady,” Deiq said as he knelt beside her, seeming to shrink back to normal size with the
movement. He cupped her face in large, warm hands and smiled, his expression so gentle and tender that
it wrenched at her heart. With that smile, some of the not-dream came back to her, and she began to cry.
He smoothed the tears away with his thumbs and said nothing as she wept. When her breath evened out
again, the weariness returned. She shut her eyes, and Deiq, seeming to understand, said, “Sleep, my lady.
I'll stay with you.”
She let the darkness take her again, unable to fight the suasion of his voice this time. When she woke, the
room had filled with daylight and the smell of fresh-cut oranges. Deiq's scent hovered near at hand, and
she felt body heat to her left. She opened her eyes, looked at the sunlit rock overhead, and breathed in
the scent of oranges and humanotherfor a while before once again turning her head to look at him.
He sat beside her pallet, knees drawn up and arms looped around them, watching her. His face held lines
of exhaustion, as if he hadn't slept for days, but he smiled when she met his dark gaze.
“Hungry?” he said, lifting a plate of sliced orange wedges.
Her stomach rumbled in response to the sharp-sweet scent. She ignored it. “Chac said you were
dangerous.”
“He was right,” Deiq said after a moment. He set the plate down slowly, his smile fading. “And I would
have told you the same about him, had you met me first.”
“I've known Chac for years,” Alyea said. “I've never seen him do an evil thing.”

Page 198

“And by inference, you've seen me do evil?”
Alyea tried to recall what she actuallyhad seen of Deiq. He'd stalked through the corridors of the palace
with a look she'd interpreted as predatory; now, with more experience to temper her judgment, she
thought perhaps it had simply been a look of assurance. Her perceptions could well have been colored
by the gossip and chatter of the court and her own family.
“You were a favorite of Ninnic's,” she said at last, unable to form anything more damning in response to
his question.
He made a small noise of disgust. “Favorite? No. I stayed out of Bright Bay while he was on that throne,
whatever rumor may say. And I certainly didn't care for him.”
She said nothing, unable to respond this time. His tone had been edged with a long-simmering frustration.
“I told you,” Deiq said quietly, lifting the plate again, “I have far worse a name in the courts of Bright Bay
than I deserve. Much of it is from that old man's spite, on a matter long past and unimportant.”
“His wife,” Alyea said, in a sudden moment of absolute clarity. “Micru said she ran away. But you took
her, didn't you? That's the only thing he could possibly hate you so much over.”
Deiq picked a slice of orange from the plate and bit into it, wiping drops of juice from his chin. He
chewed, swallowed, then held out the other half to Alyea. Her stomach demanded that she accept. The
sight of the juice dripping down his chin ripped her willpower into splinters, and she let him place the fruit
in her mouth. The small piece held the richest flavor she'd ever tasted. She found herself accepting and
eating chunk after chunk. Deiq wiped her chin with a small cloth now and again.
When the plate had been emptied, he set it aside and cleaned his own hands with the cloth. Then he
looked back at her, a mild, contented look on his face.
“No,” he said. “I did nottake his wife. She chose to leave him, and I agreed to escort her to another
place. She is still there, and still happy, and still has no desire to see him. And I have told no man or
woman where she is, and I never will, and he will not forgive me for that.”
“Why did she leave him?”
“She found out the truth of who he is and what he is,” Deiq said. “And she lost all love for him. But right
now, you don't need to worry about him, or her, or anything outside this room.” His contented
expression grew more serious. He reached out and tucked her hair back around the curve of her ear.
“You have a lot of healing to do in a very short time.”
She shut her eyes again, hearing things in his tone that he wasn't saying; and those things frightened her.
“What happened?” she asked, hearing her voice come out wobbly and nervous.
“You passed the blood trial of Ishrai,” he said. “In this case, it was more . . . literally . . . a blood trial
than usual.”
She remembered the ripping feeling, the disconnection, and shuddered.
“There was a child, wasn't there?” she said, the words barely more than a whisper. “They took it.”

Page 199

Deiq sighed. “Men have it easier,” he said. “They only provide seed. Women have to give more than
that. That's why it takes a year; it's easier if the woman can at least carry to full term before they take the
child. When. . . .” he paused, as if searching for words. “When there's as little time as you had, they have
to take . . . more. To sustain the child. Do you understand?”
Alyea lay with her eyes closed for a while. A sense of panic lurked at the edges of warm, thick layers of
weariness and the deep ache still permeating her body. “Am I . . . ruined? It felt like they ripped. . . .”
She couldn't finish.
“No,” Deiq said. He took her left hand in both of his and spoke with slow deliberation, as if
concentrating on holding his voice steady. “But it will take time for you to heal. And I don't . . . I don't
know if you'll be able to have more children.”
“That's all right,” she said in disconnected idiot calm. “That's. . . .”
Raw panic abruptly slammed through the insulating layers, and her mumbling words turned into a long,
trembling shriek. She was vaguely aware of movement, and smells changing, and someone holding her
down as she convulsed; and then the searing pain came back and shredded her into unconsciousness
again.

“I'm sorry,” were the first words she heard when she opened her eyes again. The faint flickering of a
single oil lamp set nearby showed her Deiq, kneeling beside her bed. He sat hunched forward, his head
pillowed on his arms, and seemed to be talking to himself.
“Gods, I'm so sorry,” he murmured again.
She cleared a throat raw from screaming, and he sat up sharply, wiping hurriedly at his face.
“Don't apologize more than once,” she rasped.
He smiled, a thin and painful expression, and settled back against the wall, drawing his knees up.
“Hungry?”
“No,” she said. “Why are you sorry?”
He looked away, then back to her as if forcing himself to meet her stare. “You're more hurt than I
expected,” he said. “I thought you'd be . . . I didn't think they'd be so . . . I shouldn't have sent you here.
It was a mistake.”
Her dazed compassion disintegrated with a surge of anger. “You sent me here? I thought Chac arranged
this!”
“Yes and no. Chacerly intended to put you through the trials, but I . . . altered the arrangements a little.
Lord Eredion asked for my help in guiding you; he was alarmed when the king told him who was being
sent as your advisors. They might have been good in Bright Bay, but past the Horn those were the two
very worst people he could have chosen. I could have avoided your going through the trials, by giving
you my backing, if you'd listened to me at the way-stop, and come with me; but you're stronger than I
thought you'd be, and you resisted my best efforts. I've never had anyone do that before.”

Page 200

“Egotistical bastard,” she whispered, her anger not the least bit less.
He shook his head, sober now and unsmiling. “No. Truth. You've a much stronger will than you think,
Alyea. You may even have a touch of the blood yourself.”
“What hold does Eredion have on you, to make a ha'ra'ha do his work?” Alyea said.
For the first time she saw a flash of his old arrogance; he straightened a little and said, “Nothing canmake
me do another man's work. He asked, and I agreed. The reason is between us, and not your concern.”
Pain abruptly surged through her again, and she shut her eyes, gasping for breath. He cursed softly and
spread his large hands over her torso. One covered her stomach and the other her chest, fingers splayed
around rather than across her breasts. She sucked in breath and found it easier, and the pain eased a
little.
“Acana's coming,” he said, his voice curiously unemotional.
Acana came into the room, carrying a large basin of steaming water and a bundle of cloths.
“Close your eyes,” Deiq said. Alyea obeyed, too sick and hurt to argue. She felt the blanket being lifted
away from her legs and groin, and the heavy pressure against her lower stomach easing. With that came a
storm of pain that cut her off from everything but the awareness of someone howling like a wounded
animal.
Realizing that someone was herself, that part of the pain came from a throat about to give way from too
much screaming, helped her cut down to a steady whimpering that still flayed her throat. At last she
reduced it to a heavy gasping, the best she could do.
“Breathe slowly,” Deiq said in her ear, his breath tickling her hair. “Slow and long and shallow. Trust me.
Don't gasp like that. Please. Don't scream. Slow. Slow and shallow, there you go. Listen to my voice,
listen to this rhythm . . . in. Easy . . . out. In . . . out . . . in. . . .”
She managed, with a fierce effort, to follow the tempo he gave her.
“Good girl. Good. Easy . . .gods , can't we stop that damned bleeding?”
She had the feeling she wasn't supposed to hear that last part. It had been a harsh whisper, and directed
away from her; but her hearing seemed preternaturally sharp. The slightest rustle and scrape sounded as
loud as a shout.
“Just keep her breathing,” Acana said, equally quiet. “Theha'rai'nin is on her way. All we can do is keep
her alive until then.”
The pressure came back, a thick feeling now, as if someone leaned on her lower torso, pressing a heavy
hand between her legs. The pain eased again.
“Why didn't the Jungles—”
“Shush, she can hear you. Put her to sleep, it'll be easier to hold her still that way.”

Page 201

Deiq cursed again, and lowered his mouth to Alyea's ear.
“Sleep,” he said, a soft, compelling murmur. “Alyea, sleep; please, please sleep.”
She tried to resist, to summon that will he'd called so strong, but pain took the last of her strength, and
she sank away from knowing for a time. When she woke, the room seemed to echo with an eerily
familiar song, with words in a language she felt she ought to know. The room had filled with light again,
and a spicy taste lingered in her mouth, as if someone had rubbed cactus pepper paste on her tongue.
A hand rested on her shoulder, a warm, large one. Turning her head revealed Deiq, asleep in an ungainly
sprawl against the wall. Her movement woke him; he blinked sleepily, then sat up straight, a wide grin
spreading across his face.
They looked at each other without speaking for a moment. Alyea found herself reluctantly matching
Deiq's smile.
Without taking his gaze from her face, he called out in that same oddly familiar language, and with an
eddy of scents, Acana and a strange old woman came into the room. Old—but Alyea sensed a power in
her presence that dwarfed both Acana and Deiq.
“Lady,” Alyea breathed with a profound and dizzying respect bordering on awe.
Deiq's expression shifted to startlement, and Acana raised her eyebrows. Alyea didn't care. She had no
interest in anything but this strange old woman whose very presence raised goose bumps over her entire
body.
“All right, all right,” the old woman said, smiling as she approached. “It's taken you that way, has it? All
right.”
There seemed something immensely soothing about her voice and manner. When the old woman sat on
the edge of the low pallet and lightly touched Alyea's arm, a shock ran through her whole body. The
dizzy feeling disappeared. The old woman was just an old woman: a wise one, a healer, but not . . . not a
goddess, not a ha'rethe.
Alyea shut her eyes, feeling a burst of embarrassment flood her face with color.
“That's all right,” the old woman said. “It happens that way sometimes. The sharing gets everything all
muddled in your head.” She patted Alyea's arm gently. “Close your eyes for a bit, dear, and it'll sort itself
out soon enough.”
Alyea found a comforting darkness behind her eyelids, a place of absolute silence and no physical feeling
at all. She let herself float there; she had no reason to leave, nothing to return for. She could stay here
forever.
A voice cut into the peace, breaking the silence, calling her name over and over. She knew that voice;
she didn't want to know it, didn't want to remember it. That would force her to return to the day-lit room
and the pain that waited. Much nicer to stay here, floating gently in infinite darkness.
“Alyea,” the voice said, and it sounded more insistent now. She felt a light, stroking pressure in a spot
that might, back in that room, have been her face. “Remember, Alyea, remember Oruen, and Chac, and
your ugren slaves. Remember the desert, and the Horn, and Bright Bay. Remember the ocean; remember

Page 202

the moonlight on the waters. Alyea, remember yourself, please, Alyea. . . .”
It all started to come back to her; she couldn't shut it out. The two foolish northerns, and the nagging,
unanswered questions: who or what was Chac? Had Oruen actually betrayed her, or had he simply been
a fool? Where were her ugren slaves, and was Gria really the last true-blood Scratha? These and a
dozen more questions tumbled rapidly through her mind, and she knew she couldn't stay in the lovely,
empty space any longer.
She drew in a deep breath, let it out in a long, annoyed sigh, and opened her eyes. Deiq knelt by her
side, his hands cupping her face. Even with Deiq's body blocking her view, Alyea knew from the fading
scent that the ishrait had left. By the same method, she knew that the old woman still sat in a corner.
“Alyea,” Deiq said in a tone of profound relief, and sat back on his heels, releasing her face.
She stared up at the ceiling and didn't answer for a while.
“Healer,” she said at last, and heard her voice coming out cold and hard. “Can I move?”
“As long as you don't jump around, ride a horse, have rough sex, or get into a brawl,” the old woman
said dispassionately, “you can do anything you like. In another month or less, you'll have no restrictions.
You'll find you heal rather more quickly from now on than you're used to.”
Alyea sat up, accepted Deiq's offered support, and stood. Once she steadied, she released his arm and
met the old woman's gaze.
The wrinkled face slowly creased further into a wide smile. “You're well on your way to becoming a
desert lord, with a glare like that,” the old woman said, and stood. “You won't be needing me any longer.
Tethkavit, Alyea.”
Somehow Alyea understood what that meant, although she'd never heard the word before:gods hold
you, and blessings to your strength .
“Teth-kavit,” Alyea said in return, and added, “Thank you, healer.”
“You're welcome, child,” the woman said, and left the room.
Alyea turned her stare on Deiq. He met it steadily, all his humor gone.
“How are you involved in this?” she said at last. “Thetruth this time. All of it. ”
He made a vague motion with one hand. “Lord Eredion asked me to help.”
“And why did you agree?” she pressed.
He hesitated, looking torn, then said, “He’s my father. Now and again, he calls that in for a favor.”
She stared at him, dubious but seeing no reason to disbelieve the statement. “So now what?”
“Now,” he said, “you go to your last trial.” He reached out and caught her as she wobbled abruptly.
“Once you're able to stand long enough to walk ten paces,” he added, easing her back down onto the
bed. He sat on the edge beside her and stroked her forehead lightly. “It may take another day or two for

Page 203

that.”

Chapter Nineteen
Sunlight without heat blazed down around Idisio, and strange, impossible shadows stretched over sand
bleached of all color. Idisio knew he was dreaming, but the void where sound, heat, and sensation
belonged seemed more powerful than reality. Ahead of him stood the stone spire he'd stared at earlier
that evening, looming far higher and closer than it had been. Without moving, he came to within a few
yards, then a few steps, then found himself standing close enough to examine the wind scars etched into
its dark surface.
Se'thiss, t'akarnain, something said.
He blinked—odd, to clearly feel yourself blinking in a dream —and looked around for the source of the
soundless voice. Nobody there.
Who are you?
Idisio opened his mouth to answer, found himself mute, and blinked again.
Speak, the voice commanded, and Idisio struggled to obey. It occurred to him that the voice wasn't
speaking out loud, and with that came his answer.
Idisio, he said without moving his mouth.I'm Idisio. Who are you?
He heard a gurgling, hissing noise, knew it for laughter.I call you. Come to me. I have much to ask, and
you have much to learn, young one. Come to me.
A blind terror overcame Idisio, and he tried to back away. He found himself unable to move. Pebbly
sand slid over his bare toes as some invisible force dragged him forward, closer and closer, until his nose
hovered a breath away from being crushed into the rock.
As his face pressed into the unyielding surface, he screamed—and woke.
Riss stared at him with eyes too wide and face too pale for that to have been his first scream. Two oil
lamps had been lit, and Scratha sat nearby, his dark face unusually grave.
“Tell me,” he said, and Idisio, still dazed, recounted the dream as clearly as he could remember. As he
talked, he began to feel foolish almost immediately, and waited for them to laugh at him.
Scratha didn't laugh. Not a flicker of a smile passed across his face, and Riss seemed no more amused
than the desert lord.
“Again,” Scratha said. “What did the voice say? The strange words you heard, what were they?”
“Saythis ta arkarn something,” Idisio said, the word tangling hopelessly over his tongue. “Saythiss tay

Page 204

arknain? I don't know.”
“Se'thiss t'akarnain,” Scratha said.
“Yes!” Idisio felt a great swell of relief. “You know it? What does it mean? I thought it was nonsense,
just dream words. . . .” He trailed off. Scratha's expression hadn't lightened. “What does it mean?”
“It means,” Scratha said, “that I've been a fool.” He stood. “Pack. We leave now.”
Dawn laid a faint hint of grey on the far horizon as Scratha led them through the courtyard. People were
already stirring, or perhaps only just going to sleep; some looked as if they had been drinking for some
time.
“Say nothing, look at nobody,” Scratha said as they walked rapidly across the flagstones. “Not even
each other, Riss.”
Idisio, his stare firmly on his feet, smiled a little as Riss made a faint, disgusted noise. She'd been watching
him anxiously ever since he'd awoken from his nightmare, and it had started to feel like ants crawling all
over his skin. He'd always hated being stared at.
The flagstones ended in a set of shallow steps; Idisio had a dim recollection of staggering clumsily up
them the evening before. His attention on his feet now, he managed the descent rather better. As soon as
his feet touched the uneven ground, however, he couldn't resist lifting a quick glance towards where he
remembered that frightening stone pillar to be.
“No,” Scratha said, stepping in front of him as though he'd expected Idisio to do just that. “Not yet. Trust
me. Keep watching your feet, and follow me.”
Idisio blinked hard and obeyed, almost nauseated with fear now. Without being able to see the sun or
stars as a guide, he had no idea which way they were going. He thought they'd turned west, towards the
deeper desert and incidentally towards that stone spire; but he had no intention of looking. He saw no
sense in pushing Scratha into one of his extreme moods by disobeying a clear order.
Light crept steadily through the air: the beginning of dawn. Idisio's feet, slogging through steadily deeper
and sandier dirt, became distinctly visible. His calves began to protest, reminding him of how far they'd
walked yesterday. He bit his lip and hoped his lord would call a halt soon, one at least long enough for
him to rub the soreness out of his legs.
“Stop,” Scratha said at last.
Idisio knelt instantly and massaged the beginning of a cramp from one calf.
“Idisio, look at me.”
Idisio dutifully stood and raised his gaze to the angular face before him. “Yes, my lord?”
“I'm going to explain about your nightmare now,” Scratha said. “Do you want Riss to hear this, or should
I send her out of earshot?”
Idisio didn't need to look to know that Riss fumed at the notion of being set aside like a child. “She can
stay.”

Page 205

“Riss, do you want to stay to hear this, or would you rather step aside?” Scratha asked.
“I'll stay.”
Idisio let out a long, quiet breath. For some reason he found hedidwant Riss by his side. She seemed a
steadying influence, someone who would keep him from screaming if this conversation turned into a
waking nightmare like the one two nights ago had.
Scratha motioned for Idisio and Riss to sit, and lowered himself onto the ground in front of them.
“I've already said you're ha'ra'ha, Idisio,” he said without any preamble. “You've never noticed before
because you've repressed it all your life. Riss, shut up, I'll explain later. I don't have time right now.”
Idisio nodded without speaking. Riss huffed but stayed quiet.
“So the effects, now that you've learned the stillness of aqeyva, are hitting you all at once,” Scratha said.
“And you're not prepared. I blame myself. I should never have brought you up the Wall. When you told
me about your fits I should have shipped you straight back to the northlands. But I thought if I kept you
out of aqeyva trance, you'd be safe enough. I was wrong.”
“Is this a reversible thing?” Riss said sharply. “Because if it isn't, and you'd have sent him back north, he'd
have had to deal with this all by himself, wouldn't he? That sounds fairly stupid to me.”
They both stared at her as if she'd grown an extra head; then Scratha's expression cleared.
“You're right,” he said. “I didn't see it that way. Thank you, Riss.”
“She may be useful after all,” Idisio murmured.
Scratha grinned briefly. Idisio forced a tight smile and waited tensely for his lord to continue. The desert
lord hesitated, as if deciding what to say. When he spoke, his voice sounded unusually clipped and blunt,
as if he were holding to a much shorter explanation than he wanted to give.
“Se'thiss t'akarnainroughly translates to 'beloved child of northern relatives'. It's a bit more complex than
that, but close enough. It means you've attracted a ha'rethe's attention.”
“It was a nightmare,” Idisio said in feeble protest. “Just a . . . a dream.”
“It was a vision, and a true one,” Scratha said. “There's at least one ha'rethe that still calls this area its
home, and it's inviting you over for a visit.”
“I don't want to go,” Idisio said, his mouth dry with terror.
“You have to,” Scratha said without visible pity. “Ha'reye don't take refusal very well. The last time
humans told them 'no,' the entire southlands turned into desert.”
Idisio bent forward, tucking his head between his knees, and breathed deeply, trying to keep control of
his stomach.
“What's going to happen to me?” he managed at last.

Page 206

“I don't know,” Scratha admitted. “I wish I did.”

The slab of wind-scoured rock loomed before Idisio, just as in the dream: but this time there was the
rising heat of the desert sun on his shoulders, the sour taste of fear in his mouth, and a distinct tremor in
his hands. The sweat trickling down his face came from more than heat—and a contrasting cold lurked in
his stomach, as if someone had replaced his guts with chunks of ice.
He walked forward, a step, two, then three. Scratha stayed close behind him, near enough for a grab if
Idisio should bolt. That hadn't been said—it didn't need to be.
But where would he run? There was nowhere to go. Idisio blinked hard and made himself take another
step, and another. A hissing noise stopped him. He looked down at his feet, searching for a sand-asp or
desert viper, but saw nothing moving in the sand.
“Stay still,” Scratha said very quietly, then said something else in the language of the desert, too rapidly
for Idisio to follow.
Another, louder hissing came, warbling now.
“Damn,” Scratha said under his breath, then, a little louder, “I was hoping it would let me come with you,
but it wants to talk to you alone. Idisio. . . .” He hesitated. “We'll wait as long as we can.”
Idisio stared at the lines and random markings on the rock and found he had no spit to swallow with. He
wanted to sayWhat? Wait as long as you can? How long is this going to take? Am I going to come
back? But he couldn't voice any of that without beginning to shriek halfway through, so he just nodded
dumbly.
Another faint hissing arose from somewhere in front of him.
“Walk forward,” Scratha said, voice emotionless.
One step. Two steps. Three steps. The sand beneath his feet seemed to dissolve into emptiness, and he
fell into absolute blackness. He managed, either by intent or sheer shock, not to scream. After a time, the
feeling of falling gradually ended. He stood in complete darkness, with no sensation beyond a faint chill.
The air carried no scent, no moisture, and no sound.
Idisio panted a bit, catching the breath that had locked in his throat with the unexpected fall, and finally
steadied himself. He didn't know if he stood on, in, under, or near anything. The disorientation nearly
terrified him into the scream he'd been holding back.
Could he move? Should his eyes be open? Scratha hadn't told him anything on what to expect, what was
courteous. Maybe he didn't even know.
Idisio heard a faint hissing that gurgled, almost like reptilian laughter.
His nausea faded, replaced by dizziness; he couldn't tell if he swayed in place, but his joints felt none too

Page 207

steady.
“All right,” he said, and listened to his own voice in astonishment. “I'm here. What do you want? I'm
busy, y'know.”
Talk he'd have given a tough in Bright Bay while trying to face down a potential fight. His mouth, as
always, worked faster than his brain. He shut his eyes in hopeless dismay at his idiocy.
The gurgle came louder this time, and clearer. It sounded almost human.
“Are you,” a thin, high voice said, oddly accented but perfectly clear. “Are you indeed.”
There came a long silence. Idisio felt an odd, tickling sensation inside his skull, as though something
ruffled feathery fingers through his mind. Unnerved, petrified, he stood absolutely still, eyes wide in the
darkness, and tried not to move.
“You're very unusual, you know,” the voice said quietly. It sounded rather more sympathetic now. “Very
unusual. And interesting.”
The chill deepened. Idisio shivered and rubbed at his arms.
“I'm sorry, young one,” the voice said. “I'm inconsiderate. You're cold.”
The air warmed, and the darkness faded; a few feet away, a small table and a wide chair such as Bright
Bay nobles liked to lounge on appeared. Thick dark carpet crushed softly under Idisio's bare feet.
“Please sit,” the voice said. Idisio found himself in the chair, a thick blanket drawn up around him, warm
and comfortable.
“Where are you?” Idisio asked, looking around. Other than a small circle of table and chair, the darkness
still surrounded the lit area like a featureless, endless sea.
“I am here,” the voice said in his ear, and he jumped.
A woman sat on the wide arm of his chair, smiling down at him. Idisio forgot everything and just stared at
her.
She looked barely older than Idisio, with long, dark hair that rolled over smooth, bare shoulders and
generous curves barely covered by thin blue fabric. Equally dark eyes in a northern-pale and rounded
face studied him intently. He saw an age and a calculation in that stare that abruptly recalled him to the
fact that this had to be a veneer, not the real creature.
Without moving, he tried to harden his own gaze, to hide his initial startled interest in the form it had
chosen.
She laughed and stood, walking a few paces away to another chair that must have appeared when she
did.
“So you're not easily impressed,” she said, sinking into the chair in a way that made him glad he was
sitting down. “That's the ha'rethe blood in you, young one. Any full human would have given in without
another thought.”

Page 208

He said nothing—he'd been impressed all right. He tried to breathe normally, not wanting her to see his
struggle. Riss's face came to mind, and her laughter. He found himself breathing more easily and even
smiling at the woman.
“What do you want?” he asked.
“To say hello,” she said. Her full lips curved into a smile. “To find out how my northern brethren are
doing.”
“Hello,” Idisio said. “I haven't the faintest idea. Sorry. Never met them.”
“I see that now,” the woman said, the smile fading. “And I'm disappointed in them. No ha'rethe should
ever allow one of our children to wander alone in the world.”
“I'm not one ofyour children.” He wasn't sure why, but he didn't want to claim any kinship to this
creature, or let her lay any obligation on him.
The woman studied him thoughtfully. She seemed almost to be frowning now, but her features weren't as
distinct as they had been a moment ago. “You have a great deal to learn. I should take you in myself for
teaching.”
“I stay with my lord,” Idisio said. “Iwon't stay with you!” He put all the determination he possessed into
his voice: to his surprise, she flinched.
Her form seemed to blur for a moment, then steadied. “I can't force you. And I see you're still too young
to listen to wisdom. But you have obligations, young one, that should be explained to you. Whether you
want to accept it or not, you carry the essence of two races in your body. You are ha'ra'ha, and that
means you serve no man. Not even this desert lord of yours. He's merely useful as a teacher until you
grow to your full strength. He knows this. He should have seen what you are sooner—but he's human.
I've never had much respect for their intelligence.”
Idisio opened his mouth but found no words to use in protest against that faintly disdainful tone.
“Obligations,” the woman said, and stood. “Tell your desert lord to start with those. It's important.” She
stood before Idisio's chair, looking down at him, her features sharp and clear again. Idisio shut his eyes,
swallowed hard, and tried to think about Riss.
The woman snorted softly, and a moment later the cold returned. Idisio shivered and reached for the
blanket. It had vanished. Opening his eyes, he found himself in deep darkness again.
“Send me the desert lord,” the woman's voice whispered. “Now.”
Cold crashed around him, then dissolved into a searing heat across his back and shoulders. He fell
forward onto his hands and knees. Sunlight dazzled his eyes. He covered his face with one hand and
whimpered. Startled movement fluttered nearby; then Scratha scooped him up as if he were a sick child.
He clutched, nauseous and dizzy, at his lord's support. After a moment, when his head cleared, he
managed to gasp, “She . . . it . . . wants you now.”
“Not surprising,” Scratha muttered, his face grim.

Page 209

Idisio drew a deep breath, tried to speak, and passed out.

It had turned to full dark when he woke, and the air held a sharp chill. Someone had draped a real
blanket over him. He hunched himself under its scratchy warmth more securely and blinked, rubbing his
eyes. An oil lantern sat on the ground nearby, lonely warden against darkness.
“You're awake!” Riss knelt by his side an instant later, her voice high and shrill. “Gods, Idisio, gods, are
you all right? Whathappenedto you?”
He wanted to crawl under the covers and hide from the fear that sparkled off her like the light from a
thousand splinters of glass in sunlight. He sat up instead.
“It's all right,” he said, trying to be reassuring, and glanced around. “Where's Scratha?”
“He went into thatthing,” Riss said, throwing a glance at once hostile and terrified towards the great
stone. They were camped within a few feet of it, and Idisio resisted an impulse to claw his way out of the
blanket and run like all the demons of the s'iopes' hells were after him.
“When?”
“Right after we got you settled,” Riss said. She drew a deep breath and shut her eyes. “I don't know why
he hasn't come back yet,” she added, her voice steadier. “I'm getting scared, Idisio.”
Idisio put a hand on her shoulder, trying to calm her.
“He'll be back soon,” he said, not sure he believed it himself, and wound up somehow with an armful of
trembling Riss. She curled up practically in his lap, her head buried in his shoulder.
“I don't understand what's going on,” she said.
“Neither do I,” Idisio admitted. “But he'll be all right. Don't worry.”
“And what if he doesn't come back?” Riss demanded, sitting up a bit and staring at him, her face so close
to his that he thought he could feel her eyelashes flitter against his skin.
“Worry about that when it happens,” Idisio said. He found himself at a loss. He hadn't expected her to
fall apart on him and didn't feel strong enough right now to handle it.
“I'm back,” a familiar voice said, and Scratha stepped into the thin circle of light.
Riss scrambled away and sat nearby, her face visibly reddening in the dim light. Scratha settled to the
ground in a cross-legged position and rubbed at his face wearily.
“My lord,” Idisio started, then stopped, biting his lower lip hard to hold the words back.
Scratha seemed to have lost several pounds from his already-thin frame; his face was tinged with grey,

Page 210

and his eyes held a terrifying bleakness.
“I'm fine,” Scratha said, offering a thin smile.
“What did it do to you?” Idisio blurted.
With a faint flicker of a glance towards Riss, Scratha shook his head. “Stretch out and get some sleep,
Riss. We'll be moving on soon. Sleep while you can.”
The cadence of his speech was hypnotic. To Idisio's surprise the girl made no protest. She simply lay
down a few feet away, her breathing deep and even within moments.
“We need to talk,” Scratha said.
“What did it do to you, and how did you do that just now?” Idisio demanded, caught between anger and
deep, trembling fear.
“Neither one matters right now,” Scratha said, an edge in his voice that stopped Idisio from pressing the
point. He paused, watching Idisio for a moment, then shook his head. “Why did you refuse to let the
ha'rethe teach you?”
Idisio blinked. “I want to stay with you.”
“I can't teach you as much as a ha'rethe can. Even a ha'ra'ha can help you more than I.”
“I'm staying with you,” Idisio said, clinging to the words stubbornly, not sure why.
Scratha sighed, annoyance shifting into weary resignation. Idisio had never seen his lord so open and
easy to read. That, as much as anything else, frightened him badly.
“I'll give you the best I can, then,” the desert lord said, “but eventually you're going to have to go to either
a ha'rethe or a ha'ra'ha.”
The look on his lord's face warned against disagreeing, so Idisio just nodded.
Scratha drew a deep breath and looked at the sleeping girl. “We've been granted passage,” he said in
seeming irrelevance.
Idisio listened to the strain in Scratha's voice and looked at the unremitting grey of the man's face. “You
don't sound happy about it,” he said slowly.
“Being granted passage through a ha'rethe's private underground ways is an extraordinary honor,”
Scratha said. “With a rather high price.” He shut his eyes and winced as if at some internal pain.
“Underground?” Idisio said, his voice suddenly high and squeaky.
“The ha'reye have passages all over the world,” Scratha said without looking at him. He leaned forward a
bit and splayed his hands out on the ground in front of him as if for balance. “We'll be able to go right to
Scratha Fortress in less time and far more safety than traveling the sands would have given us.” His voice
came out slower and more ragged now, as if he were reaching the end of his strength.

Page 211

“With that thing right beside us at every step?” Idisio demanded. “No, thank you!”
“Idisio,” Scratha said, his voice little more than a hoarse whisper now, “I need to rest. Argue with me
later, please.” He rolled forward and to one side, letting his weight fall on his left shoulder and from there
onto his back. After blinking vaguely at the stars for a moment, his eyelids slid closed.
“But. . . .” Idisio began. Something told him beyond doubt that Scratha really was exhausted beyond
measure this time; he gave up and glared at the stone looming over them instead. He didn't quite dare
curse it, didn't quite dare get up and bolt for the relatively safe northlands, but he thought long and hard
about both options before allowing himself to drift into a dark sleep.
His dreams were broken and uneasy. Glowing eyes and seductive women appeared and disappeared
randomly during visions of dank stone walls—and, oddly, that small, clean, sunlit room he'd seen before.
That room still felt full of a powerful, desperate anger and fear, but somehow it didn't affect Idisio so
much this time. He felt more like a bystander watching a terrible tantrum being thrown by an exceptionally
strong child. With that thought came a further sense of widening perspective, and Idisio caught a flash of
red hair, clipped close to a young boy's skull, before the vision dissolved into darkness again.
Finally, free of troubling visions for the moment, Idisio slept.

Scratha shook everyone awake shortly before dawn.
“Eat,” he said, pushing desert bread and hard cheese into their hands.
He set a water skin by Idisio and moved to stand some distance away. As Idisio chewed the tough
bread, he watched Scratha's profile in the greying light. The desert lord stared into the distance,
expressionless, showing no sign of weakness or weariness, motionless as the stone looming over them.
His pack lay at his feet, ready to go.
Riss said nothing as they ate, and Idisio didn't feel like talking. He felt well-rested, although he suspected
he hadn't actually slept much at all.Nervous energy , he told himself firmly, and concentrated on eating
and keeping an eye on his lord.
Finished with their meal, Riss shook out her blanket and folded it neatly back into her pack. Idisio
shoved the last of the cheese into his mouth and took a hasty swig from the water skin as he stuffed his
blanket untidily away. Scratha turned only when they were finished and standing beside their packs.
“Follow me,” he said.
He led them, not to the side of the stone Idisio had approached before, but around to the other side.
Unlike the eastern side, this one had more smooth spots than furrowed ridges. Scratha moved to one of
the widest flat areas and put his hands on the rock. He seemed to push lightly, and the rock face swung
inwards, revealing a narrow passage that sloped into utter blackness.
“My lord,” Idisio said involuntarily. “I can't. . . .” His protest died under the sharp glare the man gave
him.
“Well,I'm not afraid,” Riss said, and marched forward.

Page 212

“Stop a few paces in,” Scratha said, his voice pitched just loud enough to carry, and motioned for Idisio
to move. Mouth dry, Idisio obeyed, aware that his lord would likely drag or carry him if he stalled for
another moment. Scratha had that look to him right now. Putting a hand out as the light disappeared
around him, he touched a thin shoulder. He couldn't help making a muffled noise and jerking back.
Riss made a faintly disgusted sound.
“I'm not a cactus, you know,” she said tartly.
Scratha joined them. A moment later there came a scraping sound, and the square of dim light from the
opening disappeared. The door had closed, and no light remained.
Idisio took a deep breath, then another, fighting not to whimper.
“Ha'rethe,” Scratha said, and something else, words in the old desert language Idisio had never heard
before.
“Don't call that thing's attention,” Idisio said, but it came out in a whisper, barely vocalized, and most of it
caught in his throat.
A whitish-blue, sourceless glow filled the passage, barely a small hand-lantern's worth of brightness, but
Idisio's panic lifted instantly. The dim light revealed smooth, pale stone walls, a sloping floor, and a low
ceiling. Scratha stood slightly stooped, one hand on the ceiling as if to remind himself not to stand straight
up.
The light sparked glittering reflection from tiny, mica-like chips in the walls; Riss grinned in delighted
wonder, while Idisio sighed in relief that this passage felt nothing like the dank one under Bright Bay.
“Let me take the lead,” Scratha said. He kept his voice low, and as he glanced around his expression
seemed tinged with awe.
Riss flattened against the wall and let the desert lord squeeze past. Scratha led them onwards and down,
the gradual slope of the passage giving way to shallow, wide steps with wear marks more towards the
sides than the center. Idisio thought of four-legged creatures, like the marsh lizards of Kybeach, but said
nothing.
The descent went on for a long time before leveling out, but Idisio felt no pressure or panic. The light
moved with them, as though some invisible creature held an unseen lantern in their midst. The walls
stayed a dry, comforting desert color, and the passage felt clean, quiet, and safe.
As they walked, the ceiling rose, bit by bit, until Scratha could stand without difficulty. He paused and ran
both hands over the ceiling and down each wall, then across the floor and back up. He made an odd,
satisfied noise and started walking again, trailing his fingers along the wall.
“Idisio,” he said over his shoulder, “put a hand to the wall on your right. Don't look at it. Keep walking.”
The wall felt smooth at first, save for a few faint bumps and creases. The irregularities gradually became
more distinct, more deliberate in nature, like a pattern of some sort. Idisio struggled with the urge to turn
his head and look at the wall, and compromised by slanting his eyes just a bit to the right as they walked.

Page 213

To his disappointment, he saw nothing visible on the wall, even as his hand insisted there were markings
clear as any black-ink writing on clean new parchment. He blinked hard, trying to force his eyes to see
what his fingers felt, and stumbled, crashing sideways into the wall on his left. A wave of dizziness
dropped him to his knees, breathing hard. He shut his eyes, pressing his hands to the ground, waiting for
it to pass.
“I told you not to look,” Scratha said, sounding amused, and hoisted Idisio back to standing. “Open your
eyes and look straight on, get it out of your system.” He kept his hands under Idisio's armpits, supporting
him, and turned him to face the wall.
Idisio stared at the smooth tan wall in front of him. He couldn't see the slightest nub or crack or crevice,
even when he stepped forward and stared at the surface up close.
Scratha let him go, allowing Idisio time to explore the wall with hands and sight, and finally said, “It's all
like that. Walls, floor, ceiling.”
Idisio shut his eyes and ran his hands over the wall again, shaking his head.
Riss made a faint, impatient noise. “What are you talking about? There's nothing there.”
Idisio could hear her feeling along the wall nearby.
“There's nothing there,” she repeated. “Just a rough stone wall.”
“What does it say?” Idisio asked, opening his eyes.
“I have no idea,” Scratha admitted. His grin faded. “I think it's meant to be read in all directions at once.
Humans can't possibly begin to interpret it.”
“But how. . . .” Idisio stopped, looked up at the ceiling, down at the floor, and felt gooseflesh rippling
along his arms. “This isn't a cut tunnel.”
Everyone looked up and around.
“So?” Riss said.
“It's a burrow,” Idisio said. “Like a snake's.”
The light flickered slightly.
“Not quite,” Scratha said hastily. “Don't compare them to any kind of reptile,” he added in a low
undertone, bending further to speak into Idisio's ear. “They get upset.”
Idisio, with a sudden awareness of how far underground they were by now, and how precarious their
light source, pressed his lips together.
Scratha glanced at Riss, who looked puzzled. “It's writing,” he said to her, “of a sort. It's meant to be
read by touch, not sight, and it's all around the walls, which means the ha'reye probably fill the tunnel
when they travel through it.”
“Probably?” Idisio said. “I thought you . . . knew . . . haven't you met . . . ?” He stopped, suddenly

Page 214

confused.
“We see of the ha'reye what they want us to see,” Scratha said. “Some have seen what is likely the true
form. I've never been granted that.” He didn't sound regretful. “Let's keep going.”

Chapter Twenty
Aleya and Deiq sat on asun-warmed rock under an overhang, watching the last hour of daylight spread
glorious sprays of gold, orange, peach and purple across the cloudless sky.
“You've passed the blood trials of Comos and Ishrai,” Deiq said. “There's one left.”
Alyea said nothing, waiting. Ever since she'd awoken some hours ago, she found herself strangely
unwilling to speak unless she had to. The sound of her own voice felt odd to her ears, and her throat still
hurt, as if she'd been screaming in her sleep.
Noise of any sort crackled painfully in her ears, like a burgeoning infection. Deiq spoke in a
near-whisper. They'd come outside because the echoes of human movement bouncing from the rock
walls made Alyea flinch.
Outside all was beautifully silent and still, save for the occasionalwhiss-scritch of desert animals venturing
into the warm air.
“The sun-lord,” Deiq said finally, his gaze still far away, abstracted. “Datda. Most people won't name
him. It's considered bad luck, unless you're a follower. He's the god of war, of death, disease, violence,
and so on.”
“I'm going to have to fight?” Alyea said when it became clear Deiq had finished speaking.
“I don't know.” He rubbed the knuckles of one hand with the palm of the other and shut his eyes. “It's
different for everyone.”
Alyea felt her forehead wrinkling into a frown. It hadn't been a lie, exactly, but she had a feeling he wasn't
telling her the whole truth, either.
He looked up and caught her staring at him. A rueful grin appeared on his face. “Yes. Going through the
trial of Ishrai makes you harder to fool.”
“So tell me,” she said.
“I can't. There are rules to the blood trials, Alyea. I can't interfere.”
She made a disgusted noise.
“Sorry,” he said, sounding completely unapologetic.

Page 215

“What can you tell me? There has to be something!”
He considered, watching her closely. “I can tell you,” he said at last, “that if you lose, I can't help you, but
you won't be bonded to me any more.” He cleared his throat and looked away, seeming uncomfortable.
“Because I'll be dead. No surprise there.”
“Not necessarily,” he said without looking at her. “I can't say more than that. I'm sorry.”
His expression, in profile, was so bleak as he stared at the horizon that she left him alone. They sat in
silence, watching the sun settle into a fading glow, watching as the stars began to appear high above.

By evening of the next day, Alyea's sensitivity had eased enough that she could eat dinner with the Qisani
community. The room stayed mostly silent. Theishraidain—women serving penance under the protection
of Ishrai for various crimes—kept their vow of silence, and the Callen seemed to prefer to refrain from
speaking themselves. When the Callen did talk, they used low voices that even Alyea's newly sharp
hearing had trouble picking up.
There seemed no particular ranking to how people arranged their positions at table. Acana sat next to
Alyea, but around them ishraidain and Callen mixed together randomly.
The stew this time tasted spicier than it had previously. Alyea found she enjoyed it; the flavors of all food
seemed brighter lately. She glanced up to see Acana watching her, smiling.
“In your honor,” the ishrait said quietly, “I asked for the food to be made a bit more interesting. Do you
like it?”
“Yes,” Alyea said, keeping her voice to the same low volume. “Very much. What's in it?”
“It's the same stew we always have,” Acana said, “but we added more cactus peppers. I think it's rather
similar to what Juric fed you, in fact.”
Alyea took another bite, comparing memory to present, and nodded. “It is. Why doesn't it bother me any
more?”
“You're adjusting your sense of taste to avoid feeling pain,” Acana said. Her smile widened. “I always
win the pepper-eating contests with Juric these days. He doesn't understand why.”
Alyea found herself grinning in return. “I can see this is going to be useful.”
“You can also tell if there's something harmful in the food,” Acana said. “Poison, for example. You'll find
yourself making adjustments for that too. It's very hard to kill a desert lord. Or a ha'ra'ha,” she added
with a respectful nod to Deiq.
He nodded without comment and went on eating. Nobody spoke again until the meal ended and
ishraidain rose to clear the dishes. Then Acana motioned wordlessly for Alyea to come with her. Deiq

Page 216

tagged along unasked, and as the ishrait made no objection, Alyea kept her mouth shut.
They followed the ishrait into a small, unoccupied room similar to the ishell but without a pool. Several of
the strange green-oil lamps burned high but produced almost no smoke; Alyea resolved to ask about
them soon.
“The lamp oil comes from Aerthraim Fortress,” Deiq said in a low voice. “I'll tell you about that another
day.”
Alyea shot him a hard stare; he shrugged, unconcerned, and settled on a bench near the doorway. Acana
motioned Alyea to sit on one end of a long bench and took the other end herself.
Cross-legged, facing Acana, Alyea watched the flickering of the lamps move shadows around the room
and across the ishrait's face in patterns that didn't quite match what the physical flames should be
producing. Rather than making Alyea nervous, the discrepancy seemed strangely comforting.
“You have been with us ten days,” Acana said at last.
Alyea blinked, startled. “That long?”
“That long,” Acana said. “Unless you apply to become an ishraidain, ten days is the limit you can claim
sanctuary within the Qisani. You are under the hand of a ha'ra'ha, relieving us of the responsibility of
teaching you, and you are not an ishraidain. This is your last night with us. You must leave.”
Alyea took a deep breath, let it out slowly as she considered. “Can you answer some questions, before I
leave?”
Acana seemed to smile a bit, although it might have been a distortion of shadow. “Some things I can
answer. Some I cannot.”
“Who was the healer that attended me?”
“A healer. The name doesn't matter.”
Alyea rephrased the question. “What was she?”
“I can't answer that.”
Alyea smiled. “You just did. She's from the Forbidden Jungles, isn't she?”
In Alyea's peripheral vision, Deiq shifted as if about to speak, but settled into silence again.
“She traveled a long way,” Alyea said.
“Alyea,” Deiq said quietly, “she can't tell you about the healer. Please stop baiting her.”
“That wasn't my intent,” Alyea said. “My apologies, Acana.”
She turned her head to stare at Deiq, took a breath, andwilledhim to give an unguarded answer. “How
often haveyou been to the Forbidden Jungles?”

Page 217

“Not often enough,” he said, his voice rough with emotion, and grimaced. “Damnit.”
The tension in the room eased abruptly as Acana laughed. “She's going to make averygood desert lord,”
she said.
“If she survives the last trial,” Deiq said.
“I don't have your doubts,” Acana said, and stood. “I pity the one who goes up against her. For that
matter, I admit some sympathy for you, Deiq. You're going to have your hands full.”
“Tell me about it,” Deiq said, sounding grumpy.
Acana laughed again, bowed to both of them in turn, and left the room.
“No honorific?” Alyea said before Deiq could speak.
“I don't ask for one,” he said, and stood. He crossed the room and sat on the bench, drawing his legs up
to sit facing her as Acana had been moments before. “Don't do that again, Alyea. You caught me off
guard with that push.”
“I wanted to find out if I could do it,” she said.
“You can,” he said, unamused, “but don't try it with another ha'ra'ha or desert lord. It's beyond rude, and
a dangerous trick to play.”
“I won't,” Alyea said, chastened.
Deiq nodded, his taut expression relaxing slightly. “We leave tonight. The last blood trial is going to be
held at Scratha Fortress, since that's the heart of the current dispute. We should be there by morning.
Walking,” he added, anticipating her next question. “Juric is long gone, and the Callen of Ishrai don't use
sharaks —that's the word for the type of carriage brought you here.”
He held up a hand to stop her from speaking. “There's something else I have to say.”
She raised her eyebrows and waited.
“I know Pieas raped you,” he said. “I know Oruen seduced you. I know what the ha'reye did to you felt
like a combination of both. Trust me that I'll do neither. My obligations are more important than that.”
She felt her face heating, and couldn't speak.
“Remember what I am,” he said. “I can read people. I saw how you looked at Pieas, and at Oruen, and
how they looked at you—it was as if you shouted it.”
“Gods,” she said, covering her face with her hands.
“Make sure you know which gods you refer to,” he said, “when you say that in the southlands.” He
stood. “Time to go.”

Page 218

She wore a greyish-tan garment this time, one with a long, loose cut. Deiq wore a similar outfit, and
hooked a small pack over his shoulders. She had nothing to carry; even the robe from Juric had been
taken away.
Silent and tall, Acana stood in the darker shadow of the entrance to the Qisani, oil lamp in hand. She
bowed to them once. They returned the bow, and without speaking turned away and began walking.
The moon hovered low on the horizon, just past full. Wan light shifted the darkness into strange, flat
pools and lines, eerily reminiscent of what Alyea had seen at the beginning of the blood trial of Ishrai. She
tried not to think of that: a chill still ran down her spine at the memory.
The sand lay deep and loose in spots, in others hard as a thin layer over buried rock. Deiq set a steady
pace, one Alyea could easily match; still, within an hour her legs ached and cramped.
“Hold on,” she said, stopping, and bent to rub her calves. “I need a rest.”
“No,” he said, and knelt to push her hands aside. “Not like that.”
She frowned down at him. “My legs hurt.”
He sat back on his heels and put a finger to his forehead, just above his left eye. “Here. Don't use your
hands.Tellyour body it's going to walk without pain.”
“You're mad.”
He stood. “We're not stopping again. Do it my way or I'll leave you behind.” He turned and started
walking again.
She cursed under her breath and jogged awkwardly through the sand to catch up.
“How?” she panted when she reached his side.
“You're in control,” he said without looking at her. “Your body's a tool to get you from place to place.
You control the tool. You tell it what to do. You don't have to breathe hard, either, by the way. You can
control that, too.”
He didn't break stride as he spoke, moving forward with the same even pace he'd used before. Alyea
fought to slow her breath, distracted by the increasing pain in her calves.
“Don't force it,” Deiq said, still not looking at her. “Justknow it's under your will.”
“Will youstopso I can focus?” she snapped.
“No.”
“Damnyou!”
He made a dismissive gesture with one hand and said nothing.

Page 219

“This is what you call teaching?”
“Don't waste your energy yelling at me,” he said. “Use it to focus.”
She snarled, feeling rather like an angry asp-jacau, then forced her attention to her breath. Step . . .
breath . . . step . . . breath. It took a few minutes to catch the rhythm; abruptly, the pain vanished, and
she only felt the ground rolling past her feet. Her body consisted of breath moving in and moving out;
turning that breath into forward movement, and then balancing a thousand tiny adjustments in each step.
Sounds, smells, sight, the slither of fabric against her skin and the taste of the air in her mouth: all senses
combined into one long liquid moment. Pain arose, rerouted itself into energy to take another step.
Protesting muscles simply smoothed themselves out.
Astonished at the incredible, flowing clarity, she fell. The ground sprawled up beneath her with a hard
thump, shaking her breath back into erratic gasps. Aches redoubled, cramped her into a whimpering ball
for a moment, then eased.
Deiq laughed and helped her stand, brushing sand from her clothes.
“Good start,” he said. “Everyone falls the first time.”
She stood still, blinking to clear a doubling of her vision, until things returned to normal. Her leg muscles
quivered.
“What did I just do?”
“You reached center,” Deiq told her.
“It felt like an aqeyva trance,” she said, the words sounding thick and blurred to her own ears, “but I was
taught never to try walking while in trance.”
“What you call aqeyva is the closest a human can get to the discipline of the ha'reye,” Deiq said. “No full
human can ever reach as far into the center as you just did. You can do it because you've traded essence
with a ha'rethe; you're not full human any more.”
“Am I a ha'ra'ha?”
“Not even close,” he said with a patience that told her every new desert lord asked that question.
“Desert lords are . . . in a grey area between human and ha'ra'ha. As I said earlier, you may have some
of the blood, but it's too faint to mean much. It's given you an edge with learning aqeyva meditations, and
those most skilled at the aqeyva trance are considered the best candidates to be desert lords; it's part of
the blood trials.”
Alyea remembered the odd look on Juric's face when she'd come out of an hours-long trance.
Deiq nodded as though hearing her memory himself. “From what I'm told,” he said, “you did
exceptionally well. The taska said you were a natural—that you sat for much longer than any supplicant
he'd ever handled before.”
She couldn't think of anything to say to that.
“Let's move on,” Deiq said. “We've a way to go. Move faster this time.”

Page 220

He turned and started walking again.
She followed, finding it easier this time to fall into the walking trance. Time slowly ceased to matter. The
stars moved overhead, the moon shifted across the sky; she felt no sense of hurry, just the steady
sensation of sand shifting underfoot. The sand seemed almost to be helping her move forward, propelling
her faster with each step.
Emotion peeled away in layers. The vast sky overhead and the endless, moonlight-greyed sand around
them reduced everything in her life to a tiny, insignificant speck. No wonder, no astonishment remained.
Her movement became more an act of will than the shifting of muscle and bone. She moved through a
thousand contradictions and saw the resolution to each for a fraction of a second, brief and sharp, then
lost the answer again.
If she had been capable of tears she would have wept.
As dawn began to rearrange the colors of the sky, she felt a vast sense of presence ahead. Refocusing
her vision with an effort, she saw a fortress, built of enormous chunks of whitestone and granite. It
sprawled across the sand, not nearly as tall as she'd expected, far from gracious— nothing but an
unattractive pile of disorderly rock.
Deiq put a hand on her shoulder, slowing her to a stop.
“Take a moment,” he said. “You need to come all the way back to human time and space.”
He stood quietly, keeping his hand on her shoulder, as she shook off the lingering half-daze. She
shuddered at a sudden feeling that everything inside her had broken beyond repair. At last the fragmented
sensation eased, her sight cleared, and she studied the fortress ahead with a much different eye.
It still seemed an ungainly sprawl of blocks, the design almost haphazard; it fit no pattern she'd seen
before. The walls curved here, ran straight there; rose three stories high and dropped to one without
symmetry. Much of the stone seemed to have been bleached and weathered by hundreds of years of
desert sun and sandstorms, but Alyea saw two large, yellow-orange patches whose crisp lines indicated
a more recent history.
Several tents had been pitched well away from the walls of the fortress. The morning breeze carried the
thick scent of a dung-coal fire and recently cooked food: probably the ubiquitious stew with cactus
peppers. People sat on blankets spread before the tents, resting and talking quietly.
Nobody seemed to have noticed Alyea and Deiq yet.
“Stay still,” Deiq said, his voice low. “They won't see us until we move. We blend in. Take the time to
study everything.”
She saw four tents, each large enough to hold five people comfortably. The term “tent” could only be
broadly applied: these sturdy, collapsible shelters sat atop the loose sand, secured more by weight inside
than by stakes and string.
Alyea realized she knew at least some of the people in front of the tents: Gria. Sela. Chacerly. Micru. She
wasn't sure of the others, but something about the way those four figures shifted, the shape of their heads,
a gesture, a slouch, identifed them to Alyea beyond question.

Page 221

She could tell there would be no joy in the reunion. Chacerly sat with a tautness that spoke of anger and
fear; Gria and Sela slouched in despairing postures. Micru sat still, but something about his form
reminded Alyea of his coldblooded namesake, coiled and waiting to strike; he sat far from Chac.
Another group, this one composed of small dark-skinned men, huddled in a compact group: talking,
occasionally gesturing widely. They radiated anger and danger.
“Teyanain,” Alyea breathed, not at all sure she had it right; but Deiq's hand tightened on her shoulder.
“Yes,” he said.
“What are they doing here?”
He didn't answer. Glancing up at him, she saw by his expression that he wouldn't.
“All right,” she said. “I'll figure it out for myself.”
They walked forward, the sun at their backs, and for a few steps nobody noticed the movement. Finally
one of the teyanain looked up and scrambled to his feet, shouting. Moments later almost the whole camp
seemed to be standing, squinting into the bright light.
Gria, Sela, and Micru stayed seated. Alyea wondered what that meant: were all three prisoners? The two
women certainly had that look to them, but Alyea couldn't imagine Micru sitting tamely in cuffs,
somehow.
She kept her face expressionless as she and Deiq advanced on the camp, watching where people stood
and where they looked—and didn't look. The teyanain weren't glancing anywhere near the seated
people, and neither was Chacerly.
The wrinkles on Chac's face deepened as he strode forward. He directed a glare at Deiq.
“You have a bad habit,” he snapped, “of interfering where you're not wanted.”
Deiq said nothing, his own expression bland.
Chac made a dismissive, hostile gesture and turned his attention to Alyea. “Took you long enough to get
here,” he said. “And where's Juric? He should have had you here days ago.”
“I'm sorry I'm late. I was healing,” she said, keeping her voice neutral.
“Healing? From what . . . ?” He stopped, returned his glare to Deiq. “Youdidn't.”
“She did,” Deiq said, and smiled. “She bears the marks of both Comos and Ishrai.”
The teyanain had been hanging back a few paces, listening intently. At those words, one of them pushed
forward. He stood at least a head shorter than Alyea, with the dark skin and facial structure of a deep
southerner, but mysterious blue tattoos wrapped across his face and arms.
“Show them,” he ordered. “Show marks.”

Page 222

Deiq put his hands on Alyea's shoulders and turned her to stand facing away from the onlookers. She felt
him draw the loose cloth of her shirt up to show her mid-back. After a moment he let it drop and
carefully pulled the left side of her leggings down a handspan to expose her hip, then tugged them back
up and turned her around again. He gave her the faintest hint of a smile when she glanced up at him.
Chac let out a hiss through his front teeth. “You're afool .”
The teyanin leader said nothing, but seemed to be studying Alyea with markedly more respect than
before.
“How is possible?” the tattooed man said. “Ishrai year not past.”
“I'm standing in for the ha'reye,” Deiq said.
In the deathly silence following those words, Chac's weathered face seemed to lose color.
“You can't do that!” the old man snarled. “That's not allowed!”
“The ha'reye of the Qisani agreed to it,” Deiq said. “That's all the authority I need.”
A murmur rose among the teyanain behind Chac. Alyea heard “Qisani” repeated several times.
The teyanain's expressions shifted to distinctly impressed. Chac jerked, lowering his chin to his chest for
a moment, then took a deep breath and straightened.
“Juric was told to bring you straight here, not to the Qisani,” he said to Alyea. “You should not have gone
through those two trials yet. Juric will be called to account for this.”
“Juric is a Callen of Comos, and a friend of mine,” Deiq said with lazy amusement.
Chac's glare shifted back to Deiq, and it held a murderous anger this time.
Alyea cleared her throat.
“Excuse me,” she said in a tone that brought everyone's attention sharply back to her. “I'm here to take
the last blood trial. Is there a Callen of Datda here that is ready and willing to test me?”
The tattooed teyanin bowed, both hands clasped together in front of him, and when he straightened he
pointed to Chac.
“Callen,” he said, and stepped back three measured paces.
“Chac?” Alyea said in disbelief. “You can't be serious!”
The old man's expression could have melted the stone of the Qisani.
“Yes,” he said finally. “I'm here to test you.”
Alyea suspected events had moved far from the path Chac had intended.
“We left the Qisani last evening and have been walking all night,” Deiq said. “I'd like to request that she

Page 223

be given the chance to rest before beginning the trial.”
Another murmur from the teyanain. The blue-tattooed one now had an expression of open astonishment.
“You walk from Qisani inone night? ” he said.
“Toi, te hoethra,” Deiq said. “I swear it to be truth. She walked by my side with the wings of the desert
wind.”
“You have right to rest,” the tattooed man said before Chac could speak. He pointed at the tents behind
them. “You use myshall , my shelter. Go.”
“Saishe-pais—gratitude to your honor,” Deiq said, and put a hand on Alyea's shoulder. He steered her
past the watching crowd and towards a shelter that had a bright blue stripe near the entrance.
“Don't look back,” he murmured as they walked. “Don't look at anyone. Just get in the shelter and say
nothing until we're inside.”
Theshall was wide, round, and smelled of sun-baked, unwashed human. A light mat lay on the canvas
floor, grey and worn with long use; Alyea sat on it without waiting for a prompt. She looked up at Deiq.
“Whatcan you tell me,” she said deliberately, watching his mouth twitch as if against a smile, “about what
just happened out there?”
He sat beside her, drew his knees up, and grinned.
“Very little,” he said, seeming pleased about something. “Chac expected you to be here several days
ago. I made arrangements otherwise. I thought you'd be better prepared for the blood trial of Datda if
you'd been through the other two first.”
“Chac didn't want me to pass his trial in the first place, did he?”
“I can't speak to that.”
“You don't have to,” Alyea said sourly. “Gods! This is a mess.”
“I've seen worse,” Deiq said, and stretched out. “Go to sleep.”
She stared at him for a while, watching him as his breathing evened out and his eyes began to flutter in the
onset of true sleep. He said nothing more, and as the day's heat began to seep into the chill air of the
shelter, it seemed to steal away the energy she'd been using to stay upright.
She didn't remember lying down, but found herself stretched out limp next to Deiq. A heartbeat after that,
a darkness thicker than night drew her from consciousness.

Chapter Twenty-One
Page 224

As they walked, a strange, sourceless susurrus of murmurs and whispers faded in and out of Idisio's
hearing: he shivered, a prickling chill racing over his whole body. The tunnel didn't feel comfortable any
longer. Once the voices began, traveling the ha'rethe's underground ways had swiftly become an
experience as eerie and creepy for Idisio as the tunnels beneath Bright Bay.
Scratha, too, seemed to be listening at times, but Idisio found himself afraid to ask if his master heard the
voices. The desert lord's expression held a worrying sourness, and the grey strain hadn't faded from his
face yet. Riss didn't seem to be hearing anything; she trudged along, sullen and withdrawn in another of
her confusing mood shifts.
“My lord,” Idisio said at last, hoping to take his mind off the whispers echoing in the back of his head,
“you said you'd be teaching me. When are you going to start?”
Scratha glanced at Riss. “I'd intended. . . .” He paused and shook his head. “Well, Riss may as well
hear. It will help her to understand what you're going through, and you'll need that.”
“Well, thanks for that kindness,” Riss snapped.
Scratha stopped, turned, and gave the girl a ferocious glare that actually made her flinch.
She dropped her gaze. “Sorry,” she said in a small voice.
Scratha resumed walking, his face grim. “Obligations. Every ha'ra'ha has certain obligations. I've been . .
. instructed on what to tell you.” His lips pressed together and a twitch passed across his face. “I'll start
with the one you won't like most, and get it out of the way. You have to father at least one child.”
Idisio stopped cold, his legs refusing to move another step. As if he'd expected the pause, Scratha shot a
hand out, grabbed Idisio's elbow, and jerked him roughly into motion again.
“I don't make the rules,” the desert lord said without looking at Idisio. “It's part of a very old agreement
between the ha'reye and humans. Anyone with even a trace of the blood has to father or bear at least one
child if they're able. Quite a few of mixed blood are sterile; they can't reproduce. So the burden falls on
those who can, to give at least one and preferably more.”
He didn't loose his iron grip on Idisio's arm as he spoke, and Idisio gave up on the idea of stopping to
catch his breath after that incredible statement.
“You can let me go, my lord,” he said. “I swear I won't run.”
Scratha stumbled a half-step and shot Idisio a dark stare. Idisio forced a smile, and after a moment
Scratha released his grip and offered a wry smile of his own.
“It's a long way from the gardens of the Bright Bay palace, isn't it?” Scratha said.
Idisio nodded, relieved that the desert lord had picked up on the reminder and allowed the mood to
lighten a bit. “It is.”
“Who does he—?” Riss started.
“Let me finish explaining, Riss,” Scratha said sharply. “Hold your peace for a moment.”

Page 225

Riss fell silent. Idisio glanced back at her and saw an odd expression on her face. She seemed badly
rattled. He didn't get a chance to ask her about it; Scratha started talking again.
“It's best,” the desert lord said, eyes straight ahead and a pronounced strain in his voice, “if you have a
child with a full human. If you choose another ha'ra'ha, there's a greater chance the child will be sterile, or
. . . deformed.” He seemed to force the last word out. “And you'll have to take full responsibility for the
child. It'syour child, not the mother's. That reverses, of course,” he added, “for a female ha'ra'ha.” A
pained expression crossed his face.
Idisio just kept walking, alternating between staring at his feet and staring straight ahead. He felt
overwhelmed and almost numb with disbelief.
“You don't have to marry the woman you choose,” Scratha went on after a moment of thick silence. “I'd
advise telling her the truth beforehand, though, or she'll get upset when you come to take the child.” His
tone returned to dry neutrality.
“Really?” Riss said from behind them, heavily sarcastic.
Scratha ignored her. “You'll be expected to bring the child to your sworn ha'rethe for a . . . well, call it a
blessing. That's close enough. It's more of an examination, to find out if the child is, ah. . . .” He cleared
his throat again. “True blood, true bred. The ha'rethe will determine if you're really the father and whether
the child has inherited any of the blood traits.”
“Gods, you're cold!” Riss said. She sounded really angry. “We're not talking about some . . . some foal
and its bloodline here! This is a child! What's the matter with you?”
“I don't make the rules,” Scratha repeated.
“That's a dodge,” Riss said.
Scratha sighed. “Trust me,” he said, “the ha'reye are far from indifferent to their children. I don't have the
skill to explain it more gently, that's all.”
“You mean you don't have the stomach to mask what's ugly with pretty words,” Riss said.
“My lord,” Idisio said before the man could speak, “have you had to give a child?”
Complete silence followed that question for several moments. Idisio noticed, almost absently, that the
passage had started to widen.
“Yes,” Scratha said at last. “It's part of becoming a desert lord.” His expression became closed and
fierce. Idisio wished he hadn't asked, but Riss, heartless, jumped into the moment:
“Where are your children, then, my lord?” she said. “Doyou have responsibility for them?”
Another long silence. Finally, Scratha let out a long, hard breath, and said, “Dead.”
Idisio heard a faint, startled intake of breath from behind him, and knew Riss regretted her harsh
questioning.
“I'm sorry, my lord,” she said quietly.

Page 226

“Done is done,” Scratha said. After another pause, he went on, his voice steadying as he spoke: “Idisio,
I'm not saying you have to do this right away. But when you do, choose a partner with care, and make
sure she understands what she's bedding. And . . . before you do . . . you're going to have to learn from
another ha'ra'ha or ha'rethe; there's . . . it's not as simple for you as just taking a woman to bed. I don't
know . . . how to explain what's involved.”
“So he can't get some girl pregnant accidentally?” Riss asked in pragmatic tones. “That ought to be a
relief.”
Scratha half snorted, half sighed, and said nothing. Idisio, feeling a hot flush spreading across his face,
kept his gaze firmly ahead and his teeth in his tongue.
Ahead, the passageway spread further and ended in an opening that ten men could have marched
through with ease. Scratha's steps slowed as they moved forward into the room beyond, and for a long
moment they all stood on the threshold and simply stared.
Idisio had never seen such an enormous enclosure; the sloping floor of the vast cavern before them
leveled out, towards the center, into an area large enough for a thousand men to camp on. Many
openings of varying size punctuated the rim of the gigantic bowl, and ramps had been cut— no,worn ,
Idisio realized after another look—from the cavern floor up to wide ledges in front of each opening.
The same steady light that illuminated the passage filled the entire cavern, as though the ha'rethe had
reached ahead in anticipation of their arrival and poured out its strange magic to prepare the scene. Idisio
shivered again, wanting nothing more than to turn and run; but once again the only way out lay ahead, not
behind.
As they stood staring, a sense ofpresence filled Idisio's throat with wool, thickening his breath in his
chest. Scratha glanced at him, frowning, then tilted his head as though listening to something Idisio
couldn't hear.
“We need to rest, I think,” he said after a moment.
Scratha led them back into the tunnel a hefty stone's throw; the muzzy feeling left Idisio's throat, and he
drew in a deep, grateful breath. Riss slid her pack off her shoulders and sat. They all followed her lead,
Idisio between Riss and Scratha, resting their shoulders against the sloping walls. In spite of the
abundance of space, they huddled together, shoulders almost touching, as if they all shared a need in this
strange place for human contact.
Scratha passed around chunks of dried fruit, cheese, and trail jerky. They ate in silence, sipping sparingly
from their water skins.
“How much further do we have to go?” Riss finally asked.
“I'm not entirely sure myself,” Scratha admitted. “My sense of time is a bit odd down here.” He looked
as if he intended to say more, then shot Riss a sharp glance and shook his head instead. “A day or two,
maybe three.”
Idisio grimaced, not liking the thought of traveling these passages any longer than necessary. Scratha
caught his expression and grinned, although it held no humor.
“Walking the desert above us,” he said, “we'd take seven or eight days to reach Scratha Fortress, at

Page 227

best; the desert's not a flat plain. Hills, valleys, rough terrain, sandy patches all slow travel down. This
way is a straight line and an easy walk in comparison. And taking this path means we don't have to stop
for political games.” He took a swig from his water skin.
“Political games?” Riss said.
Scratha ate a piece of dried fruit, seeming to consider. “The major Families are like little kings,” he said.
“They each claim jurisdiction over a certain amount of land, and they all have ancient, huge fortresses as
the center of their power. The minor Families don't have as much land, as many people, and so they don't
have as much political power. The more desert lords sworn to a Family, the more power it holds.” He
paused to take a bite of jerky and chewed steadily.
“Boundaries shift,” he went on finally. “Sessin Family, for example, used to be a fairly minor Family,
hundreds of years ago. When they figured out the secret to clear, flat glass, they gained more power,
more wealth, and expanded their holdings to match. Last I heard they're supporting seven full desert
lords. Tereph is a fairly new Family in terms of centuries. They've been established for about two, three
hundred years at best. They were granted some land at the edge of Sessin's southern boundary, and
support three full lords.”
“Granted by who?” Idisio asked, proud that he'd snuck a question in ahead of Riss.
“A Conclave.”
“What's a Conclave?” Riss asked, frowning.
Scratha looked at her, eyes distant, for a moment, as if still lost in thought, then he shook himself sharply
and said, “A gathering of desert lords. Any time ten full lords representing at least seven different Families
are gathered, it can be considered a Conclave. Decisions made in Conclave are binding on all of the
southlands. Every desert Family has to be notified and given a chance to attend.”
“Wait,” Riss said, squinting at him. “Ten lords, but only seven Families? Doesn't that slant things a bit?”
Scratha smiled. “It can,” he admitted. “There used to be more Families, so having fifteen or even thirty
lords show up to a Conclave wasn't uncommon. These days, it's a little trickier, and that's where the
betweenConclave political games come in. Deals and alliances made out of Conclave are starting to
affect votes within Conclave.”
His tone became musing. “Pieas threatened to call a Conclave. He can't—only a full lord can, and his
own Family wouldn't back such a notion—but he's developed allies in odd places, and one of them might
just be fool enough to try it.”
“Why would Pieas want to call a Conclave?” Idisio said, bewildered. “To challenge you over his sister?
That seems a bit extreme.”
Scratha blinked and seemed mildly startled, as if just realizing he had said that aloud.
“No,” he said. “I don't think I have anything to do with that, actually. I think he wanted to challenge
Oruen's appointment of Lady Alyea to hold my lands while I'm gone. I don't think it's a bad reason, at
that. She's too young, and doesn't have the faintest idea what she's walking into. If I'd realized what a
botch he'd make of the grant, I wouldn't have done it.” He glared at the far wall as though it held the
blame.

Page 228

“Sodo you think Pieas is going to try to call a Conclave?” Riss said.
“He can't,” Scratha said, and smiled unpleasantly. “I already did. Guests should be setting up camp
outside the walls of Scratha Fortress as we speak.”

Chapter TwentyTwo
Voices and a scratchy feeling of tension jerked Alyea from a dream in which yellow-eyed creatures
glared at her from pools of deep shadow. Deiq crouched at the entrance to theshall , looking out.
He cast a tight-mouthed glance over his shoulder as she stirred.
“Trouble,” he said. “Get yourself all the way awake.” He went back to studying the uproar.
“What's going on?” She ran her hands through her hair, trying to rake out the worst of the tangles.
“Company,” he said without turning. “Pieas Sessin, and others. Sounds like someone called a Conclave,
and the first guests just arrived.”
Alyea's stomach rolled and rumbled. She scrubbed her hands over her face, trying to decide if the
sensation came from hunger or fear.
“Eat,” Deiq said. “Bread next to you.”
“Thanks,” she said absently, reaching for the bread. She hardly noticed taste or texture as she bolted the
food, her thoughts even more agitated than her stomach.
Pieas! Why? Had he convinced his Family to call a Conclave, as he'd threatened? If Sessin Family had
decided to back Pieas, and stand against her, what would that do to their relationship with Oruen? Or
did those two issues have no relation?
“Whatever the reason for this Conclave,” Deiq said, as if sensing her thoughts, “it seems to involve you.”
Alyea wiped her mouth free of crumbs. “I'm ready.”
Deiq half-turned and looked at her critically. “Remember you're more than halfway to being a desert lord
already. Don't let anyone push you around. You'll lose credibility.”
She swallowed hard and nodded. He rose from his crouch, moving out of theshallas he did so, and pulled
the flap aside for her. Outside, she swept the scene with a rapid, assessing glance. Several teyanain stood
in a rough circle around hershall; she saw the small man with the blue tattoos standing to one side. Seeing
her step out of hisshall , he nodded neutral greeting, then looked towards Chac as though to direct
Alyea's own gaze in that direction.
Chac seemed to be arguing with a tall, dark man whose face was marked with a sinuous white line from
the corner of his left eye to the left corner of his mouth. Chac looked furious, the stranger uninterested.

Page 229

As Alyea watched, the tall man made a dismissive gesture, his numerous wide bracelets jingling with the
motion, then turned his back on the sputtering old man and walked away, passing Micru, Gria, and Sela
without a glance.
Alyea realized that her two slaves and the Hidden all sat together as they had been last night: even in the
same spot. That worried her. She thought about walking over to them, but decided against it. Not
understanding the situation meant not knowing what message her attending to them might send to
watchers; safer to stay clear for now.
Altogether, the number of people in front of Scratha Fortress had easily doubled, and the tension had
quadrupled. Chac, denied his argument with the tall man, turned, spotted Alyea and started towards her,
scowling. The teyanain stiffened, looking to the tattooed one as though for directions; he nodded, and
they allowed Chac though their line without protest.
Chac didn't even seem to notice the brief exchange, his attention—and his anger—focused on Alyea
alone.
“Chac,” she said as soon as he came within earshot. She straightened her back and did her best to look
imposing instead of terrified.You're more than halfway . . .She felt her fear dissolving. Chac couldn't
possibly do anything more dreadful than the events she'd already lived through.
The tattooed teyanin moved to stand nearby. He now displayed his own set of bracelets; small, flattened
beads of semiprecious stones interspersed with even tinier silver and gold squares. She had no idea what
that meant, but Chac's gaze fastened on them and stuck as though in horrified fascination.
“Lady,” the tattooed man said, smiling. “Teth hanaa silayha; you grace us.”
Chac, still staring at the bracelets, shivered as though abruptly terrified; a moment later his scowl
reappeared and he seemed to regain control of himself.
“The grace is in your presence,” Alyea said after a moment, and stared hard at Chac. “You seem
unhappy about something, Chacerly.”
“I'm not happy aboutthat one being here,” Chac snapped, pointing at Deiq. The ha'ra'ha stood slightly
behind her, at her right shoulder. “Send him away!”
About to say:I can't , she stopped herself.
“No,” she said instead. “He's my advisor now, Chacerly. He stays.”
“You can't trust him!” Chac said.
“I trust him more than I trust you at the moment,” she said. “You have a lot to explain, old man, and I
have a feeling I won't be believing any of it.” Chac had been more rattled by the teyanin's bracelets than
by Deiq's presence; once again, Alyea wished she understood the secret language which seemed to be
passing to all sides of her.
Smiling, the tattooed man bowed slightly and drifted away as though to allow them relative privacy for
their quarrel.
“Deiq's just using you,” Chac said. “You'll find that out. That's all he does, use people for his own aims.

Page 230

He lies, Alyea, helies .”
Those words held truth, an undeniable passion, and pain; but Alyea knew better than to ask for the
history behind that. Not only would Chac probably lie again, it would divert the conversation from the
most important point: his own betrayal of her.
“You haven't been honest, yourself,” Alyea said.
“I've done what was needed,” he said. “What I was ordered to do.”
“I won't believe Oruen ordered me kidnapped.”
“You weren't kidnapped!” Chac protested. “Not by my orders, certainly. I left instructions for you to be
brought here while I diverted the teyanain from your trail. They want you dead! I was trying to save your
life.” He pointed at Deiq again, his hand shaking. “He's the one who interfered and had you taken to the
Qisani. That's the most dangerous—”
“And the most respected,” Deiq interrupted. “The Qisani produces the strongest lords.”
Before Chac could answer, the tall man with the white line on his face approached and bowed to her. His
bracelets, mainly thin strands of silver and gold twisted into narrow braids, glittered and jingled; none
seemed to hold any beads, of any material.
Alyea despaired of ever understanding what any of it meant.
“Lady,” he said. “Teth hanaa silayha.” The words held a flat, broad accent that she had never heard
before.
“The grace is in your presence,” Alyea responded automatically.
“Let me introduce myself,” the tall man went on. “I'm Lord Irrio Darden. My grandfather is the Head of
Darden. And you would be Lady Alyea.” He smiled. “Quite a fuss you have started, my lady.”
Alyea grinned at him, knowing the expression held little true humor. “You give me far too much credit,
my lord.”
He studied her for a moment, his own smile widening. “I rather doubt that.”
“My lord,” Chac started.
The tall man looked down at him and said curtly, “There is nothing from your mouth that I want to hear at
this moment.”
Alyea clamped her jaw tight to avoid gaping like an idiot. Chac's eyes seemed to glitter with a cold fury
she'd never seen in him before.
“She's under blood trial law, my lord,” Chac said. “I've agreed to test her under the auspices of the
sun-lord. That gives me rights—”
“As I've already told you, that gives you nothing,” Lord Irrio said, “until your status is determined. That's
been made a matter for the Conclave; her blood trial will have to wait until then.”

Page 231

Deiq made a soft humming sound of amusement. Chac turned a murderous glare on the ha'ra'ha, received
nothing but a faint smile in response, and stormed away, muttering to himself.
“He's a fool,” Deiq said amiably, “and a dangerous one, Lord Irrio.”
“He's a snake with one tooth, and that about to be broken,” the desert lord answered, and made a
dismissive gesture with one hand. “My lady, will you join us in a morning meal? I think we may have a
great deal to discuss.”

The simple meal consisted of slices of desert flatbread rolled around a warm, spicy filling of beans and
rice. The company and conversation proved considerably more complicated.
Three more desert lords introduced themselves to Alyea before they began to eat: Lord Rest of Ehrrat
Family, Lord Faer of Toscin Family, and Lord Salo, also of Darden Family. Deiq studied the men.
“All western Families,” he noted. “I hope the east will find itself represented fairly.”
He made no move to take any food; Alyea followed his lead.
“If they stir themselves to show up,” Lord Rest said sourly. A short man as southerners went, he stood
no taller than Alyea herself, and his dark hair looked thick and oily. He studied her critically, like a fighter
assessing his opponent's strength.
“If they've been notified, they'll come,” Deiq said.
“Desert law requires that all Families be notified in the event of a Conclave,” Lord Faer said. His voice
emerged as a deep, rumbling bass that suited his bulk; not a fat man, but sturdily built and carrying a few
extra pounds with it.
Lord Rest snorted contemptuously, but Lord Irrio said, “They've been notified. Scratha's always held by
the law.”
“Scratha!” Alyea said, startled, and found herself the target of multiple hard stares. “I . . . I thought
perhaps Pieas Sessin. . . .” she faltered, looking around. She still didn't see him anywhere. “He was
threatening to, last I saw him.”
“Pieas Sessin doesn't have the authority,” Lord Faer said.
“And Scratha does?” Lord Rest said. He wiped crumbs and rice from the corner of his mouth.
“Scratha was granted Head of Family status a long time ago,” Lord Faer said, frowning. “That's not up
for challenge!”
A movement nearby made Alyea turn her head sharply; the tattooed teyanin sat on her other side now.
“It is,” he said.

Page 232

Silence fell as the teyanin leaned forward and scooped rice onto a piece of flatbread. Nobody looked
surprised, except for Lord Faer. Lord Irrio looked thoughtful, Lord Salo offended, Lord Rest amused.
“Who's challenging Scratha's status?” Lord Faer demanded.
“I,” the teyanin said complacently. “Lord Evkit.” He held out his arm and shook it so the bracelet clicked
loudly.
“You're—” Lord Irrio blurted, clearly startled. The others stared at the bracelet with expressions similar
to the one Chac had developed on seeing it clearly.
The tattooed man grinned at them. “I,” he nodded.
Alyea's breath caught in her throat as she remembered what Juric had told her:Cida Scratha ran off with
a commoner the night after the announcement of her engagement to Lord Evkit. Her desertion was a
mortal insult.
Could this actually be the same man?
Deiq made an odd, pained sound. “Lord Evkit. I'm honored.”
The other lords hastily chorused similar sentiments. “What brings the head of the teyanain to the deep
desert?” Lord Irrio asked.
Lord Evkit turned slightly and pointed. They followed his gaze, and Alyea felt her chest tighten painfully;
he was indicating the two northern women.
“Mine,” he said, and looked at Alyea. “Stolen.”
“Bought fairly,” Deiq said, leaning forward slightly to look at the small man. “Legal under all laws.”
“Mine,” Lord Evkit repeated stubbornly. “Blood honor claim.”
Lord Rest let out a low whistle. “You're a fool if you're going to challenge that, Deiq. None of us have
that much power. Not even you.”
“None of you have that much courage,” Deiq retorted.
Lord Evkit laughed. That cooled the brewing argument, as everyone stared at the chuckling man, their
anger visibly fading into bewilderment.
“He is right,” the head of the teyanain said cheerfully. “You all know what happen if teyanain upset.” He
glanced at the ruins of the fortress and grinned.
“You'd punish a child for the fault of its parent?” Alyea demanded. “You're no better than the northern
s'iopes!”
He stopped laughing. “Punish?” he said, his face wrinkling in apparent bewilderment.
Deiq put a hand on Alyea's arm, his expression intent as if he had just glimpsed the answer to a complex

Page 233

puzzle.
“What did you intend to do with the girl, my lord?” he asked.
“Fill contract,” Lord Evkit said, as if it should have been obvious. “Get honor back.”
“What contract?” Deiq pressed.
“Cida Scratha made contract,” Lord Evkit said. “We have not forget.” He spoke patiently, as if
explaining to a child. “Cida go, have child elsewhere, child still bound to contract.”
Everyone gaped at him in stunned silence.
“You just want . . . to marry her? You're not going to kill her?” Alyea said at last, almost dizzy with relief.
Lord Evkit shook his head, his expression opaque. “Dead, no contract. Dead, no use to us.”
“But you killed. . . .” Alyea started. Deiq's hand clamped hard on her arm, cutting her off.
Lord Evkit looked at the ruined fortress again.
“You think we did this?” he asked. “You think teyanain do this?”
“You practically admitted it just now!” Lord Rest said. “What happens when teyanain are upset, you
said, and looked at the fortress.”
“We do nothing,” Lord Evkit said, shaking his head again. “We not help, when contract broken; we
withdraw support. Other Family follow us, their choice. We not tell them to turn back on Scratha.”
The expressions around the circle suggested everyone had heard the strange edge to those words. To
Alyea, Lord Evkit sounded like a man carefully dancing a thin line of truth.
The tattooed man took in the combined skepticism around him and shrugged. “I lord of teyanain. We
judges. We neutral.”
“But marrying into Scratha would have given you an alliance,” Lord Irrio protested. “You wouldn't have
been neutral any longer.”
“Not,” Lord Evkit said, shaking his head. “Teyanain carry male line. Cida agree become teyanain, no
more Scratha. No upset balance.”
“Let's wait on the rest of this discussion,” Lord Irrio said suddenly. “Scratha's not even here yet, and we
don't have the full ten. We're getting into an area that should be handled in full Conclave.”
The others seemed displeased, but nodded agreement.
“Messy,” Deiq muttered, and rose. “With your pardon, lords, we'll withdraw until the Conclave begins.”
Alyea stood, bowed, and followed Deiq as he strode away.
“Damn messy,” he said, just audible as they walked. “Damn, damn, damn.”

Page 234

“How long until the Conclave?” Alyea asked.
“It starts when Scratha and at least four more full desert lords arrive,” Deiq said. “And the challenge to
Scratha's status is going to have to be the first thing handled. Whoever calls the Conclave has certain
rights and responsibilities.” He shook his head. “Messy,” he repeated.
“It could be weeks before everyone gets here!”
He slanted her an amused glance. “Desert lords have ways of getting places in a hurry,” he said. “I
expect it won't take more than a day or two to have the full ten. Conclave draws the politicians of the
desert like a corpse draws flies.”
She made a face at the comparison. He laughed, his good humor seemingly restored, and said, “Let's
walk through the fortress.”
“Can we?” she said, startled. “Everyone is camped outside—”
“And they'll stay outside,” Deiq said. “They haven't the right to go inside, unless you invite them, and I
advise you not to do that just now. But you have the key and the right; nobody can stop you from going
in.”
“I. . . .” Alyea stopped walking, horrified. “A key?”
“You don't have. . . .” Deiq stopped too, his face an open mixture of astonishment and gathering
suspicion. “How were you going to get inside?”
Without conscious thought, she turned and stared back they way they had come, trying to pick Chac out
of the crowd. She couldn't see him.
Deiq cursed again, in several languages this time. “Your king is a fool.”
“I'm the idiot,” she said ruefully. “I can't believe I never even thought of that.”
He pursed his lips, as if restraining himself from agreeing with her, and finally said, “Well, done is done.”
“Will Chac try to get into the fortress?” she said, suddenly anxious.
Deiq looked thoughtful, then shook his head. “The fortress wouldn't let him in.”
Alyea frowned at the odd phrasing. “What—?”
“You have to get inside before Scratha arrives,” Deiq said, as if he hadn't even noticed her attempt to
speak. “Otherwise your claim is in dispute. And there's more chance of a snowstorm at noon today than
there is of Chacerly giving you that key.” He shook his head, his gaze distant. “This is a mess.”
“What claim can I have against the rightful lord?” she demanded.
“You weren't listening,” he said. “Cafad Scratha's status is going to be challenged. If the teyanain win that
challenge, and there's no valid alternative, Evkit can claim the fortress.”

Page 235

She stared at him, shocked. “Is that what this is about? He wants the fortress?”
“Yes. Marrying the girl to Lord Evkit nullifies her Scratha blood-right, but her children still have the claim;
so on the birth of that first child, Lord Evkit gains control of Scratha lands as guardian until they come of
age. Stripping Lord Scratha of his Head of Family title would nullifyhisclaim, now that there's a direct
female descendant available. And if you don't get into the fortress before Scratha arrives,your claim is
dead. But you need that last blood trial first.” He shook his head, rubbing his large hands over his face.
“Why now?” she said. “All this time since the original slaughter, why now? And why does Lord Evkit
want a fortress so far from the Horn? It doesn't make sense.”
Deiq shook his head again and didn't answer. They stood silent for a while, staring at the gathering
heat-glare over the sand. Alyea took advantage of the quiet to arrange her thoughts, picking out common
threads and possible links. Slowly, a pattern emerged from the seemingly random events.
She took a deep breath, let it out; allowed all the frustration and anxiety to leave her body. Then she
turned and started back towards the camp.
Deiq followed, frowning. “What are you doing?”
“I'm going to talk to Lord Irrio.”

An enormous red sun-tent had been put up, large enough to shelter fifty people at once; and almost that
many crowded beneath it. Under another, smaller sun-tent nearby rested four goats and two mules, and a
large enclosure for a half dozen chickens had appeared.
Alyea stared, astonished; Deiq chuckled and said, “Desert folk tend to travel with their food if they
expect to stay a while. You'll see a small city camped out here by the time everyone arrives. And most of
it's intended as a gift to the host, so they'll leave lighter than they came.”
Lord Irrio sat in the shade of the main tent, watching his surroundings with a bland expression which
shifted to a smile as Alyea approached.
“Greetings, my lady,” he said. “You grace me with your presence.”
“Do you know, my lord,” she said without preamble, lowering herself to sit in front of him, “I learned a
valuable lesson, growing up during Ninnic's reign.”
“And what would that have been?” he said, tilting his head a little to one side. He flicked the briefest of
glances at Deiq as the ha'ra'ha settled beside Alyea.
“That the most courteous people are either servants or looking to use you.”
Lord Irrio's expression went completely blank, but his eyes warned her she'd leapt onto dangerous
ground with both feet.
“I doubt you're interested in serving me,” she went on, disregarding the tension she could feel in Deiq and

Page 236

the dangerous glitter in the desert lord's eyes. “So what do you want from me,my lord ?”
After a moment, he smiled, but she saw no humor in his eyes. “I might ask the same, as you came to
speak to me, not I to you.”
Alyea said nothing. She waited, locking stares with the man, and finally some real amusement twitched
the corners of his mouth.
“It's been commented,” Irrio said, “that there are as many plots and plans in the desert as there are grains
of sand on the ground. You've simply stepped into several at once, and have them tangled around you.
I'd prefer you to step aside, out of the way.” He glanced at Deiq. “If you'd held to the original plan, you'd
be quietly sitting at your needlework in there—” he pointed at the fortress, “and we'd all be happily
maneuvering around each other without you.”
“I'm terrible at needlework,” Alyea said dryly. “I would have used the guards for pincushions and run
away the first day.”
He grinned. “I see that now. Thehask miscalculated badly.”
“You're not the first person to say that,” she said. “What does that word mean, anyway?”
“Hask?” he said. “Traitor. Someone who breaks a sacred oath. It's unforgivable.”
She nodded, not at all surprised. “Chac broke his oath to Datda,” she said. “He set aside his status as
Callen when he came to Bright Bay, and now he's trying to claim it again. Am I right?”
Deiq made a small, choking noise, and Lord Irrio's eyebrows rose.
“You are correct,” the desert lord said. “How did you—”
“I never knew he was Callen,” she said, “never heard the slightest whisper in Bright Bay of any disgrace
on his name. Once into the Horn, everything changed—his behavior, the way people treated him. Now
you're arguing over his status, and calling him a traitor; it's not all that difficult to set the pieces together
for a whole.”
“Very much miscalculated,” Irrio said after a moment.
“And I would guess,” she went on, “that one reason he misjudged me is because he's either Shakain or
from some other community that believes women are lackwits, and he can't help having that color all his
actions. Even though he's known me for years, once we came back into the southlands, old habits were
too hard to shake.”
“It's a blindness common to men of the lower western coastlines,” Lord Irrio agreed, seeming thoroughly
amused now. Deiq still sat tense and silent by her side, his evident worry not at all relieved by the desert
lord's good humor; she nodded to herself and went on ignoring him for the moment.
“What I'm not so sure of,” she said, “is why you're dropping him. He's been a useful spy all these years,
hasn't he?”
All ease drained from the desert lord's face. “I wouldn't say spy.”

Page 237

“Say contact, then. Resource, if you like. Advisor to the king is a powerful position, especially if that
advisor helped put that king on the throne in the first place. And whoever helped that advisor set up the
plans to topple the previous king would have a fairly strong hold on both men.” She paused, then added,
“Ninnic wasn't very friendly to the desert Families, was he?”
“No,” Lord Irrio said, watching her with a hooded stare. “Oruen is much easier to deal with.”
“I remember being amazed at how perfectly everything worked out,” she said. “Practically the day after
Chac said he'd taught Oruen everything he could, Ninnic died. And nobody at all, not even the priests,
argued against Oruen stepping up, although his dislike of the Northern Church was no secret.” She lifted
an eyebrow questioningly and stared at Irrio.
After a moment, he raised a hand in a surrendering gesture and laughed. “Yes, my Family, and others,
helped . . . transfer . . . the throne to a better candidate. We'll do the same with Oruen, if he shows signs
of madness.”
“So why did you drop Chac?” she said, ignoring the obvious hook to draw her off track. “I'm guessing
he went to Bright Bay on Darden orders. He set aside his Callen status for your sake. Why are you
treating him badly now?”
“Because he blundered,” Lord Irrio said, and the coldness returned to his face and tone. “A Callen of the
sun-lord who can't kill is no longer a Callen. He is useless.”
She stared at him, stunned. Beside her, Deiq sat very still, his breathing even.
“You wanted me dead?” she said.
He shrugged. “I wanted you safely set aside, doing needlework. When he knew he couldn't control you,
he should have killed you.”
She turned her head very slowly and looked at Deiq's grim profile. He stared straight ahead and didn't
return her gaze. A muscle twitched briefly in his cheek.
“You knew this, didn't you?” she said.
His head dipped in the slightest nod. He still didn't look at her.
Lord Irrio seemed amused again. “Ask him why he intervened. Ask him the real reason he stepped in the
way. Believe me, it wasn't love.”
“I never said it was,” Deiq said tonelessly.
“At least you were that honest,” Lord Irrio said, and moved as if to stand.
“Wait,” Alyea said, putting out a hand. She took a deep breath and forced herself to set aside her
simmering anger at the ha'ra'ha beside her; things had finally begun to make sense. “I have more to ask
you, my lord, if you would indulge me for another moment.”
“Ah, courtesy,” he said, and relaxed back to a sitting position. “Now, what is it you want from me?”
She managed to keep her gaze on the desert lord and her voice level as she said: “I don't believe Chac is

Page 238

the only Callen of the sun-lord in this gathering. I want to take the last blood trial. Now.”
Lord Irrio's eyes narrowed thoughtfully.
“You're far to smart to pin your plans on one man alone,” she said, aiming her words carefully, “and far
too cynical. You're the type to cover yourself in all directions. You have another Callen within reach, and
I'll bet you were going to hold that over my head to make me dance your tune.”
“Good gods,” he said, looking honestly startled, “you've got a devious mind, haven't you?”
“You're wrong,” Deiq said, breaking his silence at last. “He doesn't. I do.”
She smiled, keeping her stare on Lord Irrio. The desert lord's face split in a wide, astonished grin of his
own. “Gods, girl, you just twisted a ha'ra'ha around your finger!”
Deiq sighed. “Acana was right,” he muttered.
Lord Irrio laughed. “I will leave you alone to talk.” He stood, bowed, and walked away. Alyea
transferred her stare to Deiq.
The ha'ra'ha sat quietly, not looking at her, for several breaths. At last he sighed again and said, “Once a
Callen starts a blood trial, nothing is allowed to stop it. I knew Chacerly's status would be challenged
sooner or later, but I also knew he'd be sitting on Scratha land waiting for you to arrive, so it seemed
unlikely that those most likely to challenge would track him down before we showed up. But you took
longer to heal than I expected, and I didn't realize a Conclave had been called; and so it's too late for that
now.”
“Tell me this isn't just some game for you!”
He shook his head, still not looking at her. “You have no idea,” he said, “how complicated desert politics
get. That bit was relatively straightforward.”
“But you arranged a backup,” she said. “Why didn't you tell me? What were you waiting for?”
“It's not that simple. It wasn't entirely my doing for the backup to be here, and I haven't had a chance to
speak to him yet, to gain his aid. He's not aware that he's known to anyone here as a Callen of the
sun-lord; it's the sort of thing mostdathedain don't advertise.”
Alyea stood. His carefully ambiguous wording had clarified a suspicion into certainty. He scrambled to
his feet, his expression turning anxious.
“Let's go ask this backup Callen, then.” She turned and started threading her way through the crowd
under the sun-tent.
“You don't even know who—”
“There's only one other person it could possibly be,” she said.
After a moment he sighed and followed her without argument.
Gria, Sela, and Micru sat in a silent, sullen huddle near one edge of the tent; a handful of teyanain stood in

Page 239

a rough circle around the three. As Alyea approached, the teyanain watched her with wary interest.
She spared the guards a brief nod and passed them by, squatting in front of Micru. The two women lifted
their heads, seeming vaguely relieved to see her, then sagged back into apathetic misery; every bit of their
exposed skin showed the beginnings of sunburn, and the heat had clearly sapped their energy.
Micru straightened with considerably more vitality, seemingly unaffected by sun and heat; he met her
gaze, his dark eyes unreadable.
“Are you a prisoner or a guard?” she asked.
One dark eyebrow quirked; he regarded her with considerably more interest. “You've grown up,” he
said. “Wouldn't have thought to ask that, back in Bright Bay.”
“Prisoner or guard?” she repeated.
“Guard,” he said, with a gesture towards the two women beside him.
“And these—” Alyea pointed to the teyanain around them, “are keeping an eye onyou .”
He nodded slowly, cocking his head to one side. “Someone's been teaching you the way of things,” he
said. “About time.”
“She's passed the blood trials of Comos and Ishrai,” Deiq said from behind her.
“So I heard. Congratulations.”
“I want to take the third,” Alyea said. Micru's expression smoothed into blankness again. Gria lifted her
head, showing an awakening interest in the conversation.
“You'll have to find a Callen for that,” Micru said.
“I already have,” she said.
“You found out about Chacerly, then,” he said, and shrugged. “Well, go talk to him.”
“His status is in question,” she told him. “He's not allowed to accept supplicants until that's cleared. I
needmystatus cleared right now.”
Micru shrugged and opened his mouth to speak.
“If you'd named yourself a prisoner,” she said, “I'd have called you a fool and moved on. But you're not
a fool, and you're not just one of the King's Hidden Cadre. You're a Callen of the Sun-Lord, and Sessin
Family hired you as Darden Family hired Chacerly, to keep an eye and hand behind the scenes for
them.”
She kept her voice low, barely audible, but Gria apparently heard the words: her eyes steadily widened
into a look of horror as Alyea spoke.
“You're accusing me of treason,” Micru said evenly.

Page 240

“I'm accusing you of politics,” she said, and won a smile from him at last.
“Callen are above politics,” he said.
“You're right in the middle of this mess, like it or not,” she said, “and you were from the moment you
accepted the job from Sessin.”
He studied her for a few moments, cocking his head to one side and squinting one eye almost shut as he
considered.
“True enough,” he said finally, and added something else, sharply, in the desert tongue. The teyanain
glanced at him, their expressions startled, and shifted aside to allow a wide, clear space around the small
man. “Sit down.”
Nothing mild or amused remained in Micru's manner now. He sat up straight, his hands resting on his
narrow thighs, and watched her with the intent stare of a professional assassin sizing up his opponent.
She'd never seen that look in his eye before; he'd always kept his expression placid.
She could sense Deiq retreating a few steps as she sank to the sand to sit, desert style, in front of Micru.
She heard the faint sound of Deiq sitting as well, and a gathering murmur of attention being drawn their
way.
She ignored it all, as did Micru. She studied him as he studied her, and kept her silence, waiting for him
to speak.
He nodded after a few breaths and said, abruptly, “Have you ever killed a man?”
“No,” she said.
“Have you ever honestly wanted to?”
She didn't hesitate. “Yes.” She'ddreamed about being able to kill some of the s'iopes; and Ninnic had
been on that list. She hadn't regretted hisaccident one bit.
“Why didn't you do it?”
“I didn't have the resources or skills.”
“Meaning what? You would have botched it, or you would have been caught?”
She took a moment to choose her answer carefully. “Both.”
“Which was more important to you at that time?”
She allowed herself to grin, knowing there would be no real amusement in the expression. “Botching it.”
“And if you had the skills today, would you kill that man, whether or not you could get away with it
undetected?”
“Yes,” she said without reservation. “Absolutely, and without regrets.”

Page 241

“What if he has led a pious life without sin or evil since that earlier time?” Micru pressed.
“There is nothing in the way of grace,” Alyea said flatly, “that can make up for what this man did. If he
were before me right now, I would kill him.”
He nodded. “I will accept you for the blood trial of Datda.”
Behind her, she heard Deiq sigh; a moment later sand scraped and shifted as several people rapidly
approached.
“Alyea,” Chacerly said, his voice taut, “what are you doing?”
“Taking the final blood trial,” she said without turning, and heard a ripple of shocked murmurs go through
the crowd gathering behind her.
“You can't possibly be serious!” another voice sputtered. It sounded like Lord Rest.
Micru looked up and over Alyea's shoulder, his expression serene. “I am a sworn Callen of Datda, and
bear his mark,” he said. “I have accepted this supplicant for the blood trial of the sun-lord.”
“Youcan't!” Chac said, sounding panicked now.
“I have,” Micru said.
Someone laughed. Lord Irrio said, “You're too late, it seems. Pity you were off sulking, isn't it?”
Chac let out a low growl, and a scuffle erupted; Alyea leapt to her feet and turned to face the
commotion. Chac lay face down on the ground, his arms twisted cruelly behind him. Lord Irrio, grinning
ferociously, had a knee in the old man's back and held both skinny wrists in one of his large hands.
Lord Rest bent and picked up a thin knife with a worn dark hilt from the sand nearby. He handled it with
unusual care, and held it well away from him as he studied it.
“Clean,” he said after a moment.
“You attacked a desert lord,” Lord Faer said, as if he couldn't quite believe what he'd just seen. “Are
you insane?”
Chac writhed, cursing, and howled as Lord Irrio yanked his arms further back.
“Let him up,” Alyea said, astonished at how cold her voice sounded. “He's not going anywhere.”
Lord Irrio stood and stepped away, the grin still on his face, and watched as the old man staggered to his
feet.
“Your life and honor are forfeit twice over now,” he said cheerfully. “Only one way out of that, hask.”
Chac spat on the ground at the desert lord's feet. Lord Irrio's fist lashed out before Alyea could protest,
and Chac sprawled to the ground. He didn't get up, but huddled, glaring, and cursed them all in several
languages.

Page 242

Alyea tightened her mouth against speaking. Chac was being maneuvered, and she had no way to stop it.
She had a fairly good idea whatone way out meant, and suspected Chac had another knife hidden for the
purpose.
Something tugged at her memory. Acana's face rose in her mind, a vision of the ishrait speaking, saying
something important:
Once you begin the blood trials, you cannot stop . . . but there are two exceptions. . . .
Yes, Alyea thought, relieved.That's how to get this knot unwound.
Alyea stepped forward until she stood in front of the old man. She crouched to meet his bright, furious
stare straight on. “There's more than one way out of this, Chac.”
“Alyea,” Deiq said, sounding alarmed.
She ignored him. “Do you want your honor and your life back, Chac, or are you too much a coward to
reach for that prize?”
He stared at her, face dark with anger and suspicion. “You have no way to grant me that. Not if you
were a desert lord in full could you offer me that.”
“But another Callen can, during a blood trial,” she said, and watched his expression change.
Deiq hissed. “Alyea,” he said again, urgently.
Chac lifted his gaze to Micru, who had moved to stand beside Alyea. The muscles of his throat worked
as he swallowed convulsively.
“Micru,” he said. That one word somehow held an entire speech: acknowledgment of years of mutual
antagonism, a desperate apology, a plea; but little hope.
A taut silence hung in the air for just a moment; then Micru said, without emotion, “Accepted. You may
play a part in this blood trial.”
Deiq let out a hard breath, his dark brows drawn into a sharply wrinkledV , but held his peace.
Micru turned and gestured to the two northern women, both of whom now watched events with intense
interest.
“Stand,” he said.
Gria helped her adopted mother to her feet. The teyanain guards moved aside a little more, effectively
forcing the gathered crowd back. Chac stepped into line beside the women.
Micru scanned the gathered crowd, his dark gaze thoughtful, and finally shook his head. He turned back
to face Alyea.
“The trial of Comos,” he said, “teaches you to set your will aside for the larger good.”
Lord Faer made a faint, protesting noise.

Page 243

“You can't interfere,” someone muttered. “He has the right to do this any way he wants.”
“But it neverstarts with—”
“Shhhh.”
Micru smiled, his gaze never leaving Alyea. “The trial of Ishrai teaches you to value your own life for the
larger good.”
Alyea wished they could have done this more privately; the stares around her felt like a hundred
horseflies chewing on her skin.
Micru paused, watching her, then said, “The trial of Datda teaches you that there are times when you
must kill for the larger good.” His smile made a mockery of the words: in the back of her mind, she
wondered if he believed his own teachings, or if he killed because heenjoyed it.
If the latter, she wouldn't walk out of this trial alive.
The silence became absolute. The heat beyond the shaded area warped the air into strange shimmers.
“I tell you this,” Micru said, “every one of these three is, in some way, a threat to you personally and to
the larger good as well. Choose which is to die, and kill that one yourself. That is the blood trial of
Datda.”
Gria and Sela's sunburned faces turned splotchy; they both looked as though they might faint. Chac,
bizarrely, grinned as though pleased.
Alyea licked her lips. She'd suspected something like this lay ahead, but hadn't been prepared to choose
among these three particular people. Her mind seemed mired in disbelief and fear for a moment; then,
like lifting a foot from deep mud into running water, everything unstuck and came clear.
“May I ask them questions?” she said.
“One to each, and one to all.”
She drew a deep breath.
“Sela,” she said, noting the way the woman's hands shook. “What is the worst thing you have ever done
in your life, the thing of which you are the most ashamed?”
“You must speak truth,” Micru said before the northern woman could answer. “I will know if you lie, and
your life will be forfeit for it, whether she chooses you or not.”
Oddly, that seemed to restore the woman's courage. High color flared across her cheekbones, replacing
the pale blotching with a redder pattern; she straightened, glaring at the small man. “I'm an honest
woman! But . . . there is a lie I've been carrying for years, and it's haunted me.”
She looked at Gria. “Your mother wasn't some stranger who died on our doorstep bearing you. She's
my half-sister, and she's still alive. Her name is Gaillin, and her mother was named Bela.” Sela rolled a
quick, haunted stare around the watching crowd. “And Bela's mother was named Cida.”

Page 244

Against the murmurs from the crowd, sharp and clear, came the sound of Deiq laughing.
Gria stared at her aunt. “You lied about my mother's death?” Years of pain and frustration rang through
the question.
Sela winced but met the girl's fury steadily. “Yes. It's what she wanted. She said you were safer with me,
and not to tell you anything about her. I only saw your grandmother's name when the s'iopes gave me the
papers to sign. And they all swore the list of names only served as proof that you had enough southern
blood to be allowed to marry into a desert Family. They swore your ancestors weren't anyone noble, or
important. One of many things they apparently lied about,” she added bitterly.
“Where is my mother?” Gria shrieked, her hands tightly fisted. She looked ready to pummel the answer
out of the woman.
“I don't know,” Sela said. “That's honest truth.”
Alyea shook her head slightly, her thoughts knocked out of order by the revelation. It took her a few
moments to gather herself again.
“Stop,” she said as Gria began to speak again. “Gria. My next question is for you.”
“I'm not playing your stupid game!” Gria said hotly. “I want to know where my mother is!”
“This isn't a game,” Alyea said.
Gria stared at her, seemingly caught by Alyea's tone of voice; slowly, her temper faded. “You'd really kill
me?”
Alyea stopped herself before the wordsI don't knowcame out of her mouth. “Answer this question: are
you virgin?”
The teyanain all tautened into full alertness, and someone in the crowd made a soft, thoughtful noise.
Alyea thought she heard Deiq mutter, “Gods, girl!”
Gria's face darkened. “I'm not going to answer that!”
Alyea wished she could rub the tension from her forehead and eyes; but that would show weakness at a
very bad time.
“I'll take that as a no,” she said. It explained the last bit that had puzzled her: why a northern of any rank
would be interested in his daughter wedding a distant desert lord. It would have been far enough that
nobody would carry news of the scandal to the wedding.
“The Church would have—” Sela started.
“You don't answer,” Micru cut in sharply. “Speak again and I'll have you gagged.”
Sela swallowed, cast Alyea a beseeching look, and shut her eyes.
“Answer the question,” Micru said evenly. “Yes or no. Are you virgin?”

Page 245

“No,” Gria spat. “And I'm in disgrace. Nobody at home would take me now, since somekindpeople saw
fit to spread the word about what I'd been caught doing. Not that it was any of their business in the first
place, or yours; I'm old enough! Boys younger than I am aren't called whores for bedding a girl; why
should I suffer for enjoying myself with someone I liked?”
Sela pressed her lips so tight they almost disappeared.
“Chac,” Alyea said, focusing all her willpower on keeping her voice steady and emotionless, her
expression impassive. “Who hired the machago Ierie to take Gria and Sela south?”
He grinned at her, as if pleased she'd asked that question. “I did.”
Gria and Sela stared, open-mouthed, at the old man. He went on, unprompted, his words filling the
silence. “Oruen wanted to secure an alliance with the teyanain. I needed something of value to offer; a
chance informant gave me a lead on a female of pure Scratha descent. When Scratha put himself in
disgrace, I convinced the king to send him out of the way. The timing got a little tricky in spots, but it
worked out in the end. I chose Water's End for the exchange. The ugren cuffs surprised me; I didn't think
they'd put permanent slave cuffs on a woman destined to be Lord Evkit's wife.”
He glanced at Lord Evkit, but the teyanin lord's face remained expressionless, his attention focused on
Gria as if he'd hardly heard the last few words. Chac licked his lips and raised an eyebrow, affecting a
confidence Alyea didn't think he really felt.
“Micru,” she said, hoping she'd put the pieces together correctly, “what happens to the honor of the one I
choose for death?”
“It is restored in full,” Micru said readily.
“What about those who live?”
“The same.”
“And if any are slaves?”
“Freed,” Micru said.
“Even from ugren cuffs?”
He nodded. “In this one instance alone, yes. The teyanain must remove them, by ancient law they
themselves set down before the Split.”
Sela sucked in a hard, gasping breath, her expression suddenly hopeful.
“Then I ask,” Alyea said, turning to the three people in front of her, “that each of you think hard on what
you've said, and what you've heard, and choose for yourself whether you deserve to live or to die for
your actions.” She paused, then said, “Sela?”
“I think I deserve to live,” Sela said, straightening. “I've done nothing but protect my niece; my worst
crime is believing Ierie's good intent. That's not an offense to kill over.”

Page 246

Alyea kept her mouth shut on her opinion of what the woman's stupidity deserved, and looked at the girl
beside her. “Gria?”
“I haven't done anything wrong!” Gria said. “I believed people who said they loved me.” She shot her
aunt another sharp look, but this time Sela shrugged it aside without becoming rattled. “I've done nothing
worth dying for.”
Alyea looked at Chac, already knowing his answer.
He grinned at her, reached into his shirt, and drew another knife. He held it out to her, hilt first.
“Kill me,” he said simply.
As she took the knife, she saw the faintest of dark stains on the lower edge of the blade. Poison, more
than likely; fast or slow, she had no idea.
“The choice is made,” she said, and drew a deep breath. “Gria and Sela are free to go.”
The two women reached out and clasped hands, their stares wide and disbelieving. Gria's earlier
resentment no longer evident, they fell into each other's arms, trembling.
“Take them away,” Alyea said, her mouth dry. The teyanain, moving not as prison guards but as honor
escort now, led the two shaken women towards the other side of the shaded area. She watched them go
safely out of hearing range; looked at Micru, at Deiq, and finally back to Chac.
The hysterical sobs of the two reprieved women echoed through the taut silence.
“I won't do this for the amusement of an audience,” Alyea said. “Let's go for a walk, old man.”

Chapter TwentyThree
They stood at the lip of the great cavern bowl, looking at tunnels that led like spokes on a wheel in all
directions. Scratha's frown worried Idisio.
“Which way do we go, my lord?” Idisio ventured, hoping for a clear answer.
“I don't know,” Scratha admitted. “I thought the ha'rethe would tell me, but it isn't saying anything.”
“Why don't you just read the signs?” Riss said in a practical tone of voice.
“The. . . .” Idisio looked where she pointed, and saw, crudely etched into the nearby wall, a single word:

WALL

Page 247

The last 'L' sat at an odd, drunken slant to the rest of the letters. Scratha's frown deepened.
“Wall,” he repeated softly to himself. “Wall.” He finally looked away as if forcing himself to move. “Let's
walk around and see what the other passages say.”
Many had no label, or an obscure pictograph, or a word in some language Idisio didn't know. The
desert lord paused in front of one, however, and traced the outline of two words, roughly etched as the
first had been, with his fingertips. Idisio, peering around the man's elbow, didn't need this one translated.

BRIGHTBAY
The last letters of each word slanted at the same odd angle as the one for the Wall had displayed.
Scratha repeated that one, too, very quietly, and they moved on. A dangerous edge emerged in the
desert lord's manner, a brittle searching quality in his movements. Idisio hung back another pace and
urgently waved Riss to give the man more room as well. She obeyed, her gaze anxious and puzzled.
Almost back to the spot they had started from, Scratha stopped at another tunnel entrance. He stood
very still, his fists clenching and unclenching rhythmically. Idisio edged forward, motioning Riss to stay
well back, and squinted at the word beside the tunnel opening.

SCRATHA
Here again, the last 'A' was slanted.
Idisio had never seen anything like it. Shivers ran up and down his arms. The silence became oppressive.
He caught himself just before saying something idiotic, likeWell, good, we'll just trot on up this one and
be at your home in no time, right?
The look in Cafad Scratha's eyes could have melted sand.
“I never realized,” the desert lord whispered, as if completely unaware he had a frightened audience
watching him. “All these years, and the answer was that simple.”
He shook himself, rather like an asp-jacau after an unexpected rainstorm, and strode forward into the
tunnel. Idisio scrambled to follow, afraid of being left behind. Scratha seemed to have forgotten about his
dependants. His old madness had full hold on him, and Idisio wasn't sure how long it would take the man
to snap out of it.
Ten steps into the tunnel, Idisio glanced back to check on Riss; she hurried close on his heels, her eyes
huge and her face pale. He turned forward again, not wanting to miss a step and stumble.
Scratha was gone.
The tunnel continued straight, well-lit, and utterly empty ahead of them for a goodly distance. Idisio,
unable to stop himself, broke into a run for a few hopeless strides, opening his mouth to yell—
—and found himself falling through blackness, with a feeling similar to emerging from the ha'rethe's den;
from faint chill through intense cold into a blazing dry heat. As before, he fell forward onto his hands and
knees, astonished as he felt sand giving way under him.

Page 248

A hard hand hooked under his armpit and yanked him to his feet.
“I'm sorry,” Scratha said, sounding more impatient than contrite. “I forgot about you for a moment. Is
Riss—”
A thud and yelp cut him off.
“Apparently she is,” the desert lord said dryly, and moved to help her up as well.
“What just happened?” Riss said in a high, strained voice as she stumbled to her feet.
Idisio took a moment to be sure Riss hadn't been hurt by the unexpected fall, then turned his attention to
their new surroundings.
“Welcome,” Cafad Scratha said with a proprietary, proud, and distinctly tired edge, “to Scratha Family
Fortress.”
They stood in the center of an enormous, roofless space, much of it paved with wide, sun-bleached brick
tiles. White stone walls towered high above them to four sides, each broken at ground level by a single,
centered archway. A series of small, connected stone fountain-troughs sat silent, worn, and cracked. Dry
sticks, decaying trunks, and a heap of desiccated leaves were all that remained of what might have once
been magnificent desert palms or sand-reeds.
Idisio's skin crawled with the uneasy feeling of being watched, but except for the sounds of their own
small motions and breathing, the silence and stillness lay thick and absolute.
“How did we get here?” Riss shrilled. Her voice echoed around the empty, dead space. “What is this
place?”
Scratha, who had been staring at a dry, cracked fountain, started and looked around.
“Hm?” he said. “Oh, this is the central gathering-yard—at least, it was. I haven't been in this part of the
fortress for a long time. I used to play here; there were great desert palms. . . .” He pointed at the piles of
dry-rotted sticks and broken trunks, his expression distant, and sighed. “Long gone. There's been no
water; the well dried up. . . .”
“How did we get here?” Riss demanded, the fear in her voice no less sharp for being tinged with anger
now.
Scratha turned and studied her thoughtfully, as if deciding how to answer. “I don't know,” he said at last.
The answer clearly didn't satisfy Riss, and the desert lord added, “I learned a long time ago not to ask
how when the ha'reye are involved. I've seen much stranger things, Riss, than instant transport from one
spot to another.”
“But you're a desert lord,” Riss said.
“That doesn't mean I know everything about the ha'reye,” Scratha said. “I suspect what I know about
them wouldn't fill the average thimble.” He pointed to one of the archways. “Let's get out of the heat.”
They moved from scorching, stifling midafternoon heat into a distinctly cooler, shaded passageway lined

Page 249

with dull grey tiles on each curving wall. The rough brick from the courtyard continued underfoot. Their
footsteps scraped on patches of windblown sand for the first few steps, then became almost silent, as if
the brick absorbed sound.
Scratha led them past several archways, some of which opened to more courtyards, smaller than the first
but similar in style. Others had the remains of wooden doors blocking the views of what lay beyond, and
two actually had fine metal latticework doors. At the second of the metal doors, the desert lord paused,
put out a hand, and pushed gently against the edge of the door. It swung, noiseless, and stayed wide
open, as if waiting patiently for them to enter.
Scratha sighed. “These were my rooms,” he said, staring through the doorway.
Peering around him, Idisio saw a short passage, opening into what looked like a larger room littered with
dust-covered furniture. “Why is everything so quiet?” Riss said. “Where is everyone?” Scratha turned
and looked at her in what seemed genuine surprise. Idisio searched his memory hastily, came up blank,
and said, “You never told her anything about your family, my lord, and she's not from Bright Bay; she
probably never heard the name Scratha before she met us.”
“I didn't, other than Karic and Baylor talking about you being on their trail,” Riss said. “What
happened?”
Scratha reached out and tugged the metal lattice shut again. It closed with the faintestclank .
“My family was murdered,” he said, “slaughtered in the middle of the night with no warning. Nobody
knows who was responsible, or if they do, they're not telling.” He ran his fingers lightly over the door. “I
was walking the sands outside when it happened, as a preliminary test to see if I was fit to become a
desert lord.”
“How old were you?” Riss said, looking horrified.
“Ten,” Scratha said. He started down the passageway again. “Isn't that a little young?” Riss said.
“A little,” Scratha admitted. “But things were going on that . . . well. It would take too long to explain.”
Idisio blinked as he worked through the numbers. “You're only . . . twenty-five?”
“Twenty-eight,” Scratha corrected.
“You look twice that,” Riss said tactlessly.
Idisio glared at her; Scratha ignored them both.
They walked along empty, silent corridors, turning apparently at random into different passages. Idisio
began to suspect Scratha simply wandered without direction, and tried to think of a tactful way to ask
just where they were going.
“Here,” Scratha said at last, and pushed open another wrought-metal door. They filed into a huge room,
lined from floor to high ceiling with wide shelves of books: large and small tomes, racks of slender or
thick rolls of parchment and vellum. Sunlight slanted from high windows to spread distorted squares of
brightness against the dusty shelves. A heavy layer of dust coated a table in the center of the room.

Page 250

Idisio sneezed. The room felt heavy, solemn, and old; above all, it felt neglected, as if lonely for human
company. He seemed to hear a faint murmur in his head, as if the books spoke to welcome them. He
shook his head sharply to dispel the frightening notion.
Cafad Scratha stood for a moment looking around the room, his expression slowly becoming grim. Riss's
gaze lingered over each shelf as if she longed to reach out and sweep all the books into her arms at once.
“Sit down,” Scratha said finally. “This might take a little while.” He moved forward and squatted before
one of the shelves. He began to examine the bound volumes, lightly pushing each aside to see another
before shaking his head and shifting to his right.
They watched him without moving, stuck in mutual bewilderment.
“Er. . . .” Riss said after Scratha had searched through perhaps ten feet of the shelf. “What are you doing,
my lord?”
“There's a book,” Scratha said without looking back at her, “with a brief passage which never made
sense to me before. But now I think it might lead me to the answer of how my family was slaughtered
with no witnesses.”
Riss and Idisio exchanged a long look; their shared, silent questionWhat are wesupposed to do now?
hung in the air between them.
“Er . . . can we help you look?” Riss said, moving a tentative half-step forward.
“I can't describe it,” Scratha muttered, studying a book spine intently, then shaking his head and moving
on. “It's been so long since I've read it, I don't even remember what it looks like. I'm hoping I'll know it
when I see it.”
“Er,” Idisio said, swallowing hard. The murmuring of the books seemed to be growing both louder and
clearer. He could almost make out the words: not that hewanted to. “Er, my lord?”
“What is it, Idisio?”
“Um.” Idisio looked at his feet, wishing he'd kept silent.
Scratha didn't look up from his study of the shelves, but he snapped his fingers impatiently. “Say it
already!”
“Well,” Idisio said, “if . . . what if you could . . . sort of . . . ask where the book is?”
Scratha stopped his search and turned to stare at him. Idisio could tell he hadn't said that clearly enough.
“I mean, the . . . the fortress would know,” he went on, and heard an astonished snort from Riss.
“You've lost your mind,” Riss said. “The heat's wiping your brain out. Askwho ?” She swept her hands
out to indicate the room. “The air?”
“Um, yes,” Idisio said. “More or less the air, yes. It's . . . it feels like that tunnel. Like something's trying
to talk to us.”

Page 251

Riss opened her mouth as if to argue, then shut it again without speaking. Her eyebrows drew down in a
thoughtful squint, and she looked around the room with far more suspicion than she had a few minutes
previously.
Scratha cocked his head as if listening for something, then shook his head. “I can't hear anything,” he
said, “but I think you may be more sensitive than I am, Idisio. Why don't you try asking?”
Idisio took a deep breath and shut his eyes.Lord Cafad Scratha wants a book, he thought, trying to form
the words as clearly in his mind as he could, but not sure where to aim them.
Who was he trying to talk to? The room? The fortress? He wasn't sure, and somehow it seemed
important. He couldn't just talk to empty space. There had to be something to talkto . He hesitated,
wavering, wondering if this whole idea was absurd.
The silence continued unbroken, with no feeling of a response. Idisio decided to give it one more try. He
found himself imagining the fortress as a large, friendly beast—he carefully keptlizard from his mental
picture—curled into a huge circle around them. He addressed his thoughtspeech to the head of the giant
creature, which seemed to rest somewhere in the center of the fortress.
Lord Cafad Scratha is looking for a book,he thought again. Please help him find it.
The image in his mind abruptly clarified and shifted into something much more alien and less friendly.
Huge golden eyes opened and seemed to stare at him from inches away. Idisio stood frozen, unable to
move under that overwhelming scrutiny. He heard a faint whimpering and realized, distantly, that the noise
came from his own throat.
Se'thiss t'akarnain, a voice said in his head.Welcome .
He heard a gasp and a thud. The image in Idisio's head vanished abruptly. He felt his knees giving way; a
moment later his body connected gracelessly with the floor.
His eyes opened at the jarring impact. Riss knelt beside him, her face a ghastly white and her eyes huge.
“Are you all right?” she shrilled.
He blinked, shook his head tentatively, and sat up. The room seemed to spin around him for a moment;
Riss's hands, gripping his shoulders, brought everything back into focus.
“Yeah,” he muttered. “I think so, anyway.”
Scratha, several feet away, had a thick tome in his hands and a strange expression on his face as he
stared at Idisio.
“It just fell,” he said. “I've never seen anything like it. It fell flat, and open to the page I wanted.”
“Maybe I'm not all right after all,” Idisio muttered, and shut his eyes again. His stomach seemed ready to
turn itself inside out, and a headache started to pound behind his eyes.
“I felt. . . .” Scratha hesitated, as if unsure of himself. “I felt, for a moment, as if there was a ha'rethe in the
area. But that's notpossible! ”

Page 252

“Why not?” Riss said sharply.
“Because if there were a ha'rethe in this fortress, my family would never have been slaughtered. They
won't allow the people they protect to be harmed. And I'veneverseen or heard a single hint of one being
here.”
“The one by the Wall said it had just woken up,” Idisio said, rubbing at his temples. “What if this one was
asleep?”
“A protector would have woken,” Scratha said, but a note of doubt threaded through his voice. “It
wouldn't have slept through the attack. . . .”
Idisio had a sense of those great golden eyes opening again. They seemed amused.We protect those you
call desert lords , the voice said softly.If there is no desert lord present, there is no obligation.
Idisio leaned forward and put his head between his knees.
“It said something,” Scratha said, his voice hard and excited. “Thereis one here!Gods! I couldn't hear it
clearly. What did it say? How long has it been here?”
Seeing no safe way to refuse an answer, Idisio repeated the words, lifting his head just enough to be
clearly heard, and kept his eyes shut tight.
“Oh, gods.” Scratha sounded sick. “The attack came within days of Lord Scratha's passing . . . but what
about Orde? What about. . . .” He fell silent for a moment, then added, plaintively, “Why hasn't it ever
spoken to me?”
This desert lord has never been bound to this place, the voice said.I only allowed him passage as was his
right. With a sense of awakening interest, the beast stirred and raised its great head.He never called my
notice properly.
Idisio repeated the words again, watching Scratha's face take on the darkness of sudden anger.
“Nobody ever told me there was a ritual involved,” the desert lord said, almost spitting the words out. “I
thought that if there was a ha'rethe here, it would know me.”
I saw him as a desert lord, not as one bound to me, the voice said, indifferent now, and lowered its huge
head, closing its eyes.
“How does he get bound to you, then?” Idisio said. “And how is it you notice me?” Speaking out loud
seemed as effective as silent thought, and the hungry look on Scratha's face demanded to hear at least
half the conversation.
One golden eye opened, regarding him lazily.He must give his blood and seed, and swear himself bound
to me, while within this fortress. And you are blood kin; how could I not see you?
Idisio swallowed hard and wished he could get away with an edited version of that reply; but Scratha's
dark stare bored into him. He repeated the words, trying not to look at anyone as he did.
After an awkward silence, Scratha cleared his throat. “I was afraid it would be something like that,” he
said. He shut the book, holding his place on the page with a finger, and sighed. “Let's go sit and eat. And

Page 253

think a bit.”
Idisio started to nod—his queasy stomach might settle down with some food—and found his mind filled
with that golden stare again.
You may want to know, young se'thiss t'akarnain, there are others outside these walls. An elder—from
your point of view—ha'ra'ha and several desert lords. They seem very agitated, and there are several
with thoughts of claiming this fortress for themselves. There are thoughts of challenging this desert lord's
claim to be head of Scratha. They know he is not bound to the fortress. They do not know he is here.
Idisio stood frozen again, his mouth opening and closing like a fish out of water.
I do not care who binds themselves to this fortress. That is a human concern, and none of mine. I care
only for the pact. But you are ha'ra'ha and seem to care about their world, and so I tell you. Do as you
will with the knowledge.
The presence faded, and Idisio put his hands over his face.
“What now?” Scratha demanded, and Idisio told him.
“Those would be the lords I called for the Conclave.” Scratha's expression turned ugly. “So they're
wanting to challenge my right, are they? Because I haven't taken this ritual of blood and seed? I assume
that means. . . .” His gaze settled on Riss, and his eyes narrowed.
“Don't touch me!” Riss snapped, backing away.
Scratha's upper lip actually lifted away from his teeth in a silent snarl. He pressed his lips tight and turned
his back on them.
Idisio, caught between sympathy for the girl's obvious fear and Scratha's equally evident frustration,
stood halfway between the two sides, feeling unable to move.
“Come on,” he said, his voice coming out thin and raw. “Don't. This isn't . . . Riss, he won't. You know
that. And, my lord, she wasn't saying you would. Just . . . just stop being so. . . .” He shook his head, at
a loss for more words. The headache seemed to engulf him, streaking red-yellowgreen lines behind his
eyes.
With the faintest feather-touch of sensation, like a gentle hand stroking his hair, the headache faded away
completely. The ha'rethe said,The ritual he needs to complete is not one the human girl would be any use
for. Tell him to go to the temple in the center of this fortress.
Idisio let out a gasping breath of relief.
“Thank you,” he said aloud, and looked up at Scratha. “Go to the temple in the center of the—”
Scratha's face lit with excited hope. He sprinted from the room before Idisio could finish speaking.
“—fortress,” Idisio ended lamely. He sighed. “I guess we wait here.”Follow him.
Idisio swallowed hard. “Um,” he said, waving his hands apologetically, “I mean, I guess, you wait here . .
. please?” He tossed the last word over his shoulder as he hurried after the desert lord.

Page 254

He thought he heard Riss say something, but a glimpse of Scratha rounding a corner far ahead distracted
him from understanding it clearly. He put on his best speed and ran. A moment later he knew his weren't
the only footsteps echoing from the stone walls; a glance over his shoulder confirmed his fears. “Go back
and wait!”
“Idon't think so!” Riss hollered back at him.
Idisio mouthed a silent curse and saved his breath for running. He'd never imagined that Scratha could
run so fast; when they rounded the corner, the desert lord was further ahead than Idisio had expected.
In the background, behind his panting breath and the thudding of their feet, he sensed vast, ancient
amusement. The faintest sense of a chuckle wove through his mind.
It took all his willpower and self-control not to fling a curse at the creature for laughing at him, now of all
times. He saw absolutelynothing funny about this situation.
As if in reply, he saw a brief image of fluffy, ungainly baby chickens toddling frantically after one another
as if their pursuit were the most serious thing in the whole world; and he had to laugh. It came out
sounding manic and sharp, and he cut it off as soon as he could. Was that how the ha'reye saw humans?
Small, preening life forms with no brain to speak of, with no thought for anything larger than themselves?
Sometimes, the ha'rethe said mildly.Turn left up ahead. You'll get there before he does.
Trusting the voice, although Scratha could still be seen in the distance, Idisio dove into the next left-hand
passage that appeared, vaguely registering as he went through that a metal lattice door stood open. He
heard the sound of Riss's footsteps still following him. She wasn't letting him out of her sight, for some
reason.
Don't you understand why yet?the ha'rethe said.She's in love with you.
Idisio almost staggered to a stop at that concept.
“You're wrong,” he muttered under his breath, and forced his legs to keep moving. “You'rewrong .”
Somehow the creature managed to deliver a mental shrug.Turn left again. Now turn right. And you might
want to slow down—
Idisio managed to stagger to a stop just before he plowed straight into a heavy wooden door. Riss
squawked as she rounded the corner behind him and bounced herself against a wall to avoid slamming
into Idisio.
“Youcouldhave said,” she complained, entirely unfairly, and rubbed her shoulder as she glared at Idisio.
He shook his head, still rattled by the ha'rethe's comment, and pushed the heavy door open. It swung,
easy and silent, as if it had been oiled yesterday. Idisio took a deep breath and stepped into the room
beyond.
It was round, and moist, and silent in a deep, profound way that felt more alive than the rest of the
fortress. The sun streaming into the room had a different quality as well, a more filtered feel. Looking
around, awestruck, Idisio realized living trees graced this room, great towering desert palms that
stretched to the high ceiling and feathery sand-bushes that stood taller than Scratha.
“Gods,” Idisio breathed. “I thought the well went dry!”

Page 255

A huge pool in the center of the room, easily fifteen feet across, was clear enough to see white sand at
the bottom.
The well did not go dry, the ha'rethe said.It was blocked, and there was not a lord present, so I left it
alone, and slept. Now I am awake, and you are here; you and this desert lord will need the water. So I
have repaired it, and replaced the growing things.
“That's pretty heartless,” Idisio said, looking back at the pool. “People died here because they didn't
have water.” He moved forward a few steps.
To their right, another door opened and Scratha came in. He stared around the room, his expression
dumbfounded. Astonishment turned to a sharp frown when he saw Idisio and Riss.
“What—” he started, then stopped, his gaze on the door they had come in through. The amazement
returned. “How did you—” He stopped again, and shook his head, evidently caught between wonder
and anger.
“That's the door the Callen use,” he said finally. “Their quarters are sealed. I've never been able to get
into that part of the fortress.” He shook his head once more, slowly, and waved a hand as if dismissing
the issue. His gaze traveled around the room again, drinking it in as if he had been craving water for days
and found himself unexpectedly presented with a lake.
He never had a need, the ha'rethe observed dryly.Or the right. You are ha'ra'ha; you can go anywhere
you like.
Scratha didn't seem to hear the voice.
“This room,” he went on, moving forward, “was . . . last time I saw it, it wasdead . There was a dry pit
where that pool is now, and these trees . . . they were little more than dry, dead husks. I remember
wondering what kept them from crumbling like all the others in the fortress.”
Humans, the ha'rethe sighed.No understanding of the deep ways of the world at all.
Idisio found himself grinning. This ha'rethe was nothing like the one he'd encountered near the Wall. He
actually found himself liking this one. Remembering the dry well, he stopped smiling. Likable or not, this
creature had a ruthless streak to be wary of.
The ha'rethe seemed puzzled.You say “ruthless” and “heartless.” We hold to the Agreement. We do not
concern ourselves beyond that. We have never pretended to.
Scratha paced around the room. He laid a tentative hand on the trunk of a giant desert palm, as if afraid it
would crumble at his touch.
“Amazing,” he muttered several times as he walked, and finally moved to stand in front of the pool.
“You'll need to leave,” he said over his shoulder.
Now why would you have to leave when I summoned you?
Idisio choked back a hysterical laugh. “Er . . . my lord,” he said awkwardly, “the ha'rethe wants . . . me
at least . . . here. It told me to follow you, and which way to turn to get here before you did.”

Page 256

Riss gave a snort of annoyance and muttered, “You'renot sending me away.”
Scratha turned and stared at them. For the first time, he seemed nervous.
“I don't understand why,” he said a bit peevishly.
Idisio shrugged, spreading his hands.
“We should at least send Riss away.”
No, the ha'rethe said. She may stay as well, if she wishes.
Scratha seemed to read Idisio's expression. “She's to stay too?”
Riss gave a satisfied “Hah!”
Move out of the doorway,the ha'rethe said patiently. Idisio jerked, startled, and motioned Riss forward
into the room. As soon as they were clear, the doors swung shut, latching with a thin clang.
Do you care for the northern girl? the ha'rethe said unexpectedly.
“Um. . . .” Idisio said out loud, and coughed to hide the uncertain noise as the others looked round at
him.
I see the answer, the ha'rethe said before he could figure out a response.You need not reply.
Idisio swallowed hard, not entirely sure what the ha'rethe saw in his mind. Care for Riss? She was all
right as a traveling companion, but he wasn't sure that qualified as caring for her.
Riss stared at Idisio, then made a dismissive gesture and said, “What do we do now, Lord Scratha?”
Scratha seemed to consider for a moment. “Sit before the pool. Leave yourself some space. This isn't
anything like what I've been through before; I have no idea what's going to happen.”
With those less-than-reassuring words, he moved forward and lowered himself to the ground in front of
the pool. Idisio took up a position on the desert lord's right; Riss settled to Scratha's left.
Riss squared her own shoulders and put her gaze on the pool.
Take a knife and prick your finger, the ha'rethe instructed gently.
“What, all of us?” Idisio said aloud, then realized that Scratha and Riss were already moving to obey. So
they heard the ha'rethe for themselves now; he found that something of a relief. He'd hated relaying the
creature's messages.
It may benefit you as well, little ha'ra'ha. You must decide for yourself.Idisio swallowed hard and pulled
out his belt knife, hoping Riss and Scratha hadn't heard “little ha'ra'ha.” He'd never live that designation
down.
Shake a drop of blood onto the sand before you.

Page 257

Idisio obeyed, then stared at the tiny dark spot on the sand in front of him, feeling a sense of unreality. He
heard Scratha murmur something that sounded like, “I offer the gift of blood to prove my honorable intent
and dedication of my life to this place.”
Idisio kept his mouth firmly shut. He couldn't bring himself to say that. Riss seemed to have chosen
silence as well.
Abruptly, he felt a wrenching sensation somewhere in the center of his forehead. His surroundings faded
into a hazy mist, and a distant wailing sound advanced towards him. The wail resolved into words:“How
can you do this to me?” a woman screamed. “How can you do this to my child?”
“Demon-spawn!” a male voice shouted, heavy with anger. “Burn it! Drown it!”
“It's a child!” the woman protested. “How can you harm a child?”
“It's a damned creature!” the male voice replied, still loud and furious. “You'll be joining it, woman,
never fear!”
“The hells you say!” the woman cried with sudden, spitting passion. “No! You won't lay a hand on either
one of us!”
Another wrenching feeling: a scream echoed in Idisio's head. The internal noise faded, although the fog
remained.
Great golden eyes opened in the mist and regarded Idisio.Interesting , the ha'rethe of Scratha Fortress
said.Your mother was a very strong woman.
Idisio found himself shaking uncontrollably.That was my mother? Of course. There is something odd
about this Ghost Lake area. I would like you to go investigate this. I cannot travel so far any longer. Will
you do this for me?
Idisio nodded, still dazed.I will, he said, not sure why he agreed.How did my mother escape?
I believe her ha'rethe helped her.The creature seemed to frown, emanating displeasure.From what I see
in your memory, it may have harmed some of those holding her captive in order to allow her to escape. I
do not like that. What should it have done? Idisio demanded.Let us die?
There are many ways to do a thing, the ha'rethe said peacefully,and not all of them require violence to a
lesser form of life.
You're responsible for the death of this entire fortress!Idisio shot back, suddenly angry again.You let
everyone be murdered!
Idisio had the sense that the creature sighed.You have been among humans too much, little ha'ra'ha. You
do not understand. But enough. I am finished with the Scratha lord.
Warm water splashed onto his face, just a few drops that speckled his forehead and cheeks. Realizing his
eyes had been shut for some time, he opened them and wiped the moisture away, blinking hard.
Scratha knelt beside him, his face almost glowing with happiness. “Thank you, Idisio. I would never have
known this was even possible without you.”

Page 258

Idisio, staring at the sopping-wet desert lord, couldn't help noticing that Scratha's clothes seemed to have
disappeared somewhere along the way.
“Uhm,” he said uncertainly.
Cafad Scratha glanced down at himself and grimaced ruefully.
“Damn,” he said, pushing straggles of long hair from his face. “Didn't expect that. Well. . . .”
Idisio hastily pulled off his own shirt and tossed it to Cafad. The tall desert lord wrapped it around his
waist.
“Did it work?” Idisio said. “Are you bound?”
Cafad smiled. “Yes,” he said. “I'm bound to Scratha Fortress as rightful lord now. I never knew contact
with one of the ha'reye could feel like that. It's always been painful before. That waswonderful.” He
seemed to bask in the memory for a moment, then grew serious again. “I can feel the fortress around me.
I can hear the sound of everything that happens within these walls. It's incredible. I've always felt a strong
connection to this place, but now I feel as if I've been living half-blind all my life.”
Idisio found himself grinning. “That's good.”
Turning his head to look at Riss, he stopped smiling; she lay sprawled on the sand, limp and unmoving.
He scrambled over to her, but Cafad pulled him back.
“Leave her alone,” he said. “She's only tranced. She'll come out of it when she's ready. Being in the
presence of a ha'rethe can be a bit overwhelming. She'll be fine. I have to get some proper clothes and
attend to myguests ; go get our packs from the library and bring them back here, sit with her until she
wakes up. The doors are open, and in any case I think you could probably open any door in this fortress
if you wanted to.” His speech rattled faster than usual.
About to shake his head in denial of Scratha's last comment, Idisio remembered what the ha'rethe had
said:You are ha'ra'ha; you can go anywhere you like.
“Yes,” he said slowly, “I could.”
The vision of his mother had made it allreal. He was a ha'ra'ha. He had status of his own, almost as
though he'd been born of a royal line, and nobody could take that away from him. He didn't even have to
be afraid of Cafad Scratha's moods any longer.
The ha'rethe by the Wall had been right. Cafad wasn't going to be able to teach him what he needed to
know past a certain point. The idea of working with a ha'rethe or another ha'ra'ha didn't scare Idisio any
longer; it seemed perfectly logical and right.
Nobody could hurt him anymore. Not the bullies of Bright Bay, not Cafad Scratha, not even the king or
the desert lords gathered outside; and when he went back north, nobody was going to lay ahand on him.
He found himself grinning as he turned towards the door, and broke into an easy jog as he went to fetch
the packs.

Page 259

Chapter Twenty-Four
“I should have killed you,” Chac said without heat. “When Scratha handed over his lands to the king, I
suggested your name.”
Aleya nodded, unsurprised.
“I thought you were inexperienced enough to let me set you aside. Before we were halfway down the
Horn, I knew you were stronger than I'd expected. The night I decided to arrange an accident, you
caught Deiq's eye. That made harming you too dangerous. Then he followed us; I couldn't lay hand on
you until he was out of the way. I started to lay plans for Water's End, but again, before I could act Sela
and Gria were dumped on us, with Deiq's name attached. I had to get you away from anywhere he had
influence.”
Alyea glanced over her shoulder. Deiq and Micru sat several yards behind them, relaxed but intent; Deiq
seemed amused. He nodded to Alyea, and she turned her attention back to Chac.
The old man had followed her glance. “Of course he can hear me. He's ha'ra'ha. He can probably hear a
bird fart at half a mile.”
Alyea heard a faint answering chuckle behind her. “Go on.”
“Lord Evkit wanted you dead for interfering with his plans. I bought myself time to negotiate by sending
you away with Juric. Lord Evkit agreed to meet me at Scratha Fortress and allow me to put you through
the Sun-Lord's blood trial. I had a trial in mind that you wouldn't have had a chance with.”
“What was it?” Alyea asked.
“I planned to put you up against a teyanin in unarmed combat, not to the death, but until third blood was
drawn,” Chac said. “It's a test someone properly trained would have had a reasonable chance with, and
it's traditional to have some form of combat in the trial.” He glanced over his shoulder at Micru.
“The requirement,” Micru said, “is that blood must be shed in this trial. That will be filled.”
He obviously had hearing as sharp as Deiq's; Chac hadn't raised his voice.
Chac shrugged and turned back to Alyea. “True enough. A supplicant who fails a trial puts themselves
under the control of their testing Callen. The tester can do anything they like with the supplicant at that
point. Lifelong servitude, if desired.”
“Nobody told me that!” Alyea said involuntarily.
Chac grinned unpleasantly. “No, I imagine there's a lot nobody told you. But it's true, although
traditionally the Callen simply kill the supplicant. We don't like keeping slaves. Too burdensome. But I
could have given you over to Evkit as a slave, and as slaves can't own slaves, ownership of Gria and Sela
would have passed to me. I could have legally given them to Evkit as well. Nothing illegal involved.” He

Page 260

paused and stared into the distance.
“Except that Deiq stepped in,” Alyea said.
Chac nodded without looking at her. “He threw everything out of order when he put you through the
other two trials first. And when the desert lords started arriving for the Conclave and my status was
challenged, I lost all control of what was happening.” He shook his head. “Darden should have trusted
me. If Lord Irrio hadn't interfered at the last moment, I still could have pulled it off.”
“And what would you have gotten out of it?” Alyea asked.
“They would have found my wife, and brought her to me,” Chac said, but Alyea sensed no love in the
words. “I would have regained my honor and cleared my name in full by killing her.”
Thatsurprised her; she stared at the old man, shocked by how calmly he'd said such a horrible thing.
“I thought you loved her,” she said.
“I did, and I do,” Chac said. “If she had stayed with me, I would have fully renounced my status as
Callen and stayed north of the Horn the rest of my life. But she found out I wasdathedainand chose to
abandon me, though I'd never harmed her.” He shot a glare over his shoulder at Deiq. “When she left, I
decided my own life was more important than a faithless woman's. I've been searching for her ever
since.”
Alyea shook her head, unable to grasp how a man she'd known as an occasionally irascible but mostly
gentle person could harbor such coldblooded thoughts.
“Deiq wasn't the one who named you asdathedain to your wife,” Micru said quietly.
Chac half-turned, his eyes widening. “You?”
Micru's implacable stare said more than words could.
“Why?”
“You can't just walk away from being a Callen and start a new life where nobody knows who you are,”
Micru said. His face tightened. “If it were that easy, I would have done it myself long ago.”
The old man glared, his breath hissing through his teeth, for a few moments, then returned his attention to
Alyea.
“I'm done talking,” he said. “I won't answer anything else. Get this over with.”
“You're right. It's time.”
“Yes,” Chacerly said with no visible regret or fear. “It's time.”
“No,” Deiq said, “it's not. It's too late.”
Alyea turned and stared at him, bewildered by the odd statement. “What are you talking about?”

Page 261

“When you're on the land of a fully named and bound desert lord,” Deiq said, “any blood shed must be
approved by that lord. Even a blood trial killing must have his blessing.”
“But there's no—” Alyea stopped, seeing the humorless grin spread across Deiq's face.
“Someone has gotten into the fortress, called the ha'rethe's attention, and bound themselves to this
place,” Deiq said. “We're right up against the wall; further out I might not have noticed, but it's like ice
water in my face at the moment. Can't you feel the difference in the air?”
Alyea looked up at the great stone walls behind them, then sniffed the air; it held the dusty scent of sand,
rancid smoke from cookfires, and something else. She didn't have a name for it, but a richness tinged the
air that hadn't been there before.
“I feel it,” Micru said, forehead crinkling a little. “Chacerly, did you give the key to someone?”
“No,” Chac said. He reached into a pouch at his waist and produced a thick silver band. “Here it is.” He
proffered it to Alyea.
Alyea took the heavy ring from the old man and weighed it dubiously in one hand, studying the family
crest etched on the widest part of the band.
“Put it on,” Chac suggested. “Left thumb.”
She received a nod of agreement from both Deiq and Micru. The ring slid onto her thumb and hung
loose.
“I'll have to bind it up,” she said.
“I wouldn't worry about that,” said a new voice. All four scrambled to their feet and turned to meet the
newcomer, who had approached so silently that even Deiq seemed honestly taken by surprise.
A moment of shocked silence hung, still as the motionless air around them.
Chac broke first, with an incredulous: “Lord Scratha?”
The man grinned, showing very white teeth in a dark face and deadly cold eyes above an eagle's nose.
“I'll take that ring back now, if you don't mind,” he said, holding out his hand.
Once the ring had been settled safely back on Scratha's hand and brief introductions made, the man
focused a sharp stare on Alyea. With little prompting, she found herself explaining about the blood trials,
which led to an explanation of how she'd wound up being named king's proxy in the first place, the flight
of Pieas Sessin, and, somehow, the incident with Wian.
Scratha's face grew still on hearing Wian's name. His hard stare returned, and he looked at the old man
beside her.
“You claim blood trial right to kill this man?” he said.
“I do,” Alyea said.

Page 262

“Do you think he deserves death?”
She didn't hesitate, although her anger at Chac had vanished. “Yes.”
Scratha seemed to consider for a moment, then said, “As you are on my bound land, the trial falls under
my jurisdiction. I have the right to override even a blood trial choice. I believe Pieas Sessin, if present,
would be a more suitable choice. Do you agree?”
Deiq said, “That right hasn't been invoked since before you were born, Lord Scratha. Yes, it's a valid
point in desert law, but as you're putting her up against a skilled fighter with no scruples, who certainly
isn't going to sit still for her, I have to ask: are you just trying to get her out of the way?”
“No,” Scratha said evenly. “I believe Pieas needs to be called out for his crimes.”
“Why not Chacerly?” Deiq demanded. “He tried to have you ousted! And Pieas has done nothing to
harm you directly.”
“On my own land,” Scratha said, the words clipped and tight, “on mybound land, I don't have to answer
toanyone ,s'e Deiq. Not even to you.”
Deiq squinted sharply, studying the Scratha lord as though both annoyed and puzzled, then shook his
head and made a dismissive gesture with one hand. Alyea had a sudden sense of words passing her by
without sound; a chill shiver tickled her spine as she remembered a disembodied voice, speaking in the
darkness of the ishell without pause for breath.
More than the hidden language of bead-patterns seemed to be passing her by of late.
She moved a step forward; the motion brought everyone's attention back to her as she said, “Lord
Scratha, I will gladly allow Pieas Sessin to step into Chacerly's place, if Micru will allow the switch; and if
Chac regains his honor as he would have by completing this trial as planned.”
Deiq made a displeased sound, but Micru nodded slowly, his expression unreadable as he studied
Scratha.
“I advise against it,” Micru said, “but I'll allow the switch.”
Chac let out a long sigh. He and Micru locked stares for a moment; then the old man nodded slightly and
lowered his gaze submissively. Alyea's skin prickled, and she looked away, biting her lower lip and
wondering if she had just made a dreadful mistake. Deiq's dark, sour stare did nothing to help her nerves.
“Let's go find out if Pieas is here,” Lord Scratha said.
“We will wait here,” Micru said, still staring at Chac. “Bring him to us when and if you find him. If you do
not find him, Chacerly remains the chosen of this trial.”
Scratha nodded curtly and strode away, Alyea and Deiq trailing behind.
“Big damn mistake,” Deiq muttered as they walked.
“Why?” she said through her teeth.

Page 263

He shook his head without answering.
“If all you're going to do is moan empty warnings, then shut up,” she said tartly, and increased her pace.
As they rounded the corner of the fortress and approached the camp, heads turned and people began to
stand up. By the time the group reached the edge of the sun-tent, a wide path appeared through the
crowd, as if nobody wanted to be in their way.
Alyea's whole body ached with the desire for food and sleep. Her stomach felt queasy and her hands
shook; she didn't feel ready to face a child wielding a stick, let alone Pieas Sessin.
Scratha moved to the center of the sun tent and stopped, turning in place to scan the crowd with his
dark, grim stare.
“I'm lord of this fortress and guardian of these lands,” he said, his voice carrying, without apparent effort,
to the furthest listener. “I called this Conclave. Are there nine other full lords here?”
“No,” Lord Irrio said, stepping forward. “Myself, Lords Faer, Evkit, Salo, and Rest are present. Lords
Halin and Obis of the eastern coast are within an hour's journey, and a bird just came in with word that
Lords Azaniari and Rowe are on their way as well.”
Scratha let out a soft grunt, as though he'd just been kicked in the stomach. “LordAzaniari?”
Lord Irrio smiled without humor. “She didn't tell you, Scratha? Goodness, imagine her keeping secrets
from her darling. The sands may just swallow us all.”
“I certainly wouldn't grieve if it swallowedyou ,” Scratha said, recovering his composure. “You're as
much an ass as you've ever been, Irrio.”
“And you're just as simple-minded,” Irrio shot back. “What brought you back? We thought you were
safely out of the way.”
“I wonder how much of that was your doing,” Scratha said, and a smoldering danger flared in his eyes.
“Take my fortress from me, would you? Not while I have breath to fight it with!“
”That wouldn't have been a problem,“ Irrio snapped, “if the boys hadn't lost their nerve.”
“The boys?” Scratha said, his eyes narrowing.
Lord Irrio pursed his lips and looked away loftily.
Lord Faer pushed his way to the front of the gathered crowd, his plump face damp with sweat and pale
with excitement. “Lord Scratha!”
Scratha's stern expression softened for a moment. He looked at the stout lord almost affectionately.
“Lord Faer,” he said. “Greetings, and welcome to my home. I'm glad to see you finally took up my
invitation to visit.”
Lord Faer beamed, then sobered and looked worried again. “There's a challenge to your status,
Scratha,” he said. “You'll need to settle it with Lord Evkit of the teyanain.”

Page 264

Scratha's expression changed with astonishing speed: from amiably welcoming to taut and murderous.
“Where is he?” Scratha said through his teeth. “I'll gladly give him an answer he's been owed for some
years now.”
“Here,” a voice said, and the crowd parted again to let the small, dark teyanin lord through.
The two lords faced each other. Scratha's glare sent shivers up Alyea's back, but Evkit seemed unruffled.
“You challenge my status?” Scratha said.
“No,” Evkit said. “Not now. Before, yes. Now, you are bound. Challenge withdrawn.” He shrugged.
“Then I'll challengeyou,” Scratha said, “on the matter of my family's death.”
Evkit shook his head. “No. We not kill.”
“You didn't have to, you three-headed, snake-mouthed son of a dasta whore!” Scratha roared. He
emanated a terrifying rage; the crowd around them hastily moved back a few more steps, clearing a
wider circle around the two men. “Youled them to my family! You told them where to go and when to
strike, and you gave them the means to do it! There's blood on your hands, Evkit, and by all the gods as
witness, I'll bathe in your Family's blood before I'm done with the retribution for it!”
“Good gods,” someone muttered. “He's declaring blood feud with the teyanain? Heis insane!”
“Not I,” Evkit insisted, seeming unaffected by the threatening words. “I say nothing.”
“Someone did,” Scratha said grimly, “and that person had to be teyanain. Your family were the first
guardians of the secret ways; your marks are all over the central eastern chamber. Three of the passages
are freshly labeled in the common northern tongue, and all three have the slant-mark that only the
teyanain use.” He paused, his gaze locked on the small man, then added, slowly, “They read as follows:
'Wall,' 'Bright Bay,' and 'Scratha.'”
As he spoke, more than one of the desert lords made distressed noises. Alyea didn't look to see who
protested; her attention stayed riveted on the two men arguing.
Evkit's eyes widened.
“You could not have come through there!” he said, and his voice rose, distinctly high and shaken. “You
do not have permission! You are lying!”
Scratha's grin reminded Alyea of the snarl just before an asp-jacau snapped its sharp teeth into flesh. “
Ish-tchiki, ha'rethe esse chaka.I paid the price to the watcher of the eastern Wall passage, and was
granted entry to its underground ways.”
“Damn it, Scratha!” Lord Irrio said, and pushed forward urgently. “Don't speak of this here! Are you
mad?”
Scratha's eyes held a bright and feral light. “When a secret is used to kill those it should protect, I no
longer consider it sacred.”

Page 265

“You'll damn us all for the folly of one?” Lord Irrio demanded. “Save this for Conclave!”
“The damage is done,” Lord Faer said, his face unusually stern. He glanced over the crowd, assessing,
and shook his head. “Close the camp, and we'll hold the rest of this discussion in private. Scratha, not
another word on this topic until then!”
“While you're closing the camp,” Scratha said, “would someone be so good as to bring Pieas Sessin to
me?”
Lord Faer, who had begun to turn away, swung back to face Scratha. “Why?”
Irrio turned away to mutter in the ear of a lean, scarred man dressed in Darden Family colors. The man
nodded and hurried away. The other lords, Alyea noticed, were motioning to their own assistants and
sending them off on hasty errands.
“I have words for him,” Scratha said, and his mouth twitched as though with brief amusement. “He may
have none for me, but it's my damn land and he'll have to listen, at the least. Is he in your tents, Lord
Faer?”
“Yes. He came to me for shelter. He claims the young lady here— Alyea, isn't it?—laid unfair
accusations against him, and wanted his chance to be heard in Conclave.”
Scratha's mouth stretched in a thin smile. “Bring him here.”
“I promised him my protection, Lord Scratha,” Lord Faer said coldly.
“I won't hurt him,” Scratha said, without a flicker in his expression.
Lord Faer frowned. “I want to know your intentions, Scratha.”
“I've invoked my right to change the supplicant's choice in the sunlord's blood trial. If Pieas agrees, he
will switch places with Chacerly.”
Lord Faer blinked, his eyebrows arching, and stared at Alyea, then back to Scratha. “You've lost your
mind!” he said. “Pieas would be agreeing to his own death!”
“But an honorable one,” Scratha said mildly. “In any case, my lord, it's not a request. So go get him
beforeI do.”
Lord Faer shook his head, his lips tightening, and seemed about to refuse again.
“You promised him the chance to clear his name,” Deiq said. Everyone turned to look at him as if they
had forgotten he stood there. “What better way to do that than to let him confront his accuser? Does that
really have to be in full Conclave?”
Lord Faer started to speak, then hesitated, rubbing his forehead fretfully.
“How's this,” he said. “I'll grant you a meeting with him. If he convinces the majority of the full lords
present that he's innocent, then I'll release him from my protection and you can pursue the matter of the
blood trial with him without my interference. If he's guilty of the charges, you can do as you like with
him.”

Page 266

“Agreed,” Scratha said promptly. “Now will you gogetthe boy already?”
Lord Faer sighed and hurried away without looking back.
Deiq moved to stand beside Alyea, his expression somber and a little worried.
“That man,” he said in her ear, “is a lunatic.”
“Lord Faer?” she said, keeping her voice as low as his. The crowd around them buzzed with whispers
and muttering; even the desert lords nearby probably wouldn't hear her through the noise.
“No,” he said. “Scratha. He just talked openly about one of the most sacred secrets the desert lords
hold. If he had spoken those words so publicly anywhere else but his bound land, he'd be dead right
now, desert lord or not, along with every servant present who isn't bound under the Threefold Oath. But
they can't kill him here, not now.”
“The—”
“I'll explain later. As it is, most of the servants who heard him are likely dead as soon as they leave his
land. The camp's being closed to keep the smart ones from bolting.”
“Does he know that?” Alyea said, shocked.
“Oh, yes,” Deiq said. He went back to watching the crowd, eyes narrow and thoughtful, and only shook
his head to further questions.
Lanterns and torches flared into life as the afternoon sunlight faded. Scratha seemed content to wait,
blinking almost placidly in the uncertain light. Lord Evkit made no move to withdraw; Alyea had the sense
that he knew better than to test Scratha's volatile temper further.
At last, the camp was declared secured and Lord Faer returned, Pieas Sessin glowering sullenly at his
side.
“Let's move away a bit for this discussion,” Lord Scratha said. He lifted two long-necked torches and
their holders and motioned for the assembled lords to follow him. Scratha led them around the side of the
fortress, back to the place where he had first surprised Alyea. Chac and Micru, dim shadows in the
growing twilight, stood up as the group approached. The light from the torches in Scratha's hands
wreathed his face in shifting, demonic light.
“I'll beg your pardon, my lords,” Scratha said, “that I'm not inclined to invite you inside my home until I
resolve a few issues, given you were plotting to take it from me.” He drove the torches into the sand, one
to either side of him. The flaring, sputtering light threw shadows into disarray among the assembled
group.
Lord Rest said, “You've changed, Lord Scratha, since I last saw you.”
“I've learned a lot since the last time you saw me, Lord Rest.” His dark stare swept over the group again.
“I only wonder why you haven't tried to kill me before, since I'm such an inconvenience to your little plots
and plans.”

Page 267

“We don't want you dead,” Lord Faer said, appearing deeply shocked.
Scratha grinned fiercely. “Dead or safely out of the way in the northlands, what would be the
difference?”
“You'd have been happier wandering the north,” Lord Irrio said, prompting a startled, dismayed look
from Lord Faer. “You were only ever granted desert lord status as a courtesy, Scratha. Last of a dead
line? You didn't have a chance.”
“What?” Lord Faer gasped. They ignored him.
“Except that I'm not the last,” Scratha said. “Sons and daughters of the line are still living, and one of
them is less than two hundred yards from where we stand now.” His gaze went to Lord Evkit, and what
little humor he had been displaying faded.
“We didn't know that then,” Lord Irrio said carefully.
“Oh?” Scratha said, not taking his stare from the teyanin lord. “Imagine, Lord Evkit keeping secrets from
his darling. The sands may swallow us all.”
A dark flush spread across Lord Irrio's face. For a moment, he looked ready to launch an attack on
Scratha. Alyea found herself tensing, unsure whether to back away or to intervene. Deiq's pressure on
her elbow tightened briefly.
Lord Irrio drew a deep breath, seeming to gain control of himself.
Lord Evkit watched everything with a bland detachment that seemed almost eerie in the midst of the
raging tempers around him.
“It's not worth arguing,” Lord Faer said abruptly. “Scratha's a full lord, bound to his lands, and with a
true female line open he'll be rebuilding his family within a few years. You're never going to be able to
leave your lands again, Scratha, and neither will the girl—her name's Gria, isn't it? She'll never leave the
southlands.”
Lord Evkit opened his mouth as if to speak, then shook his head and subsided, a faint smile on his face.
Alyea suspected he had been about to mention his previous claim on Gria, and had thought better of it for
some reason. More than likely, the fact that the poor girl wasn't a virgin any longer had been enough to
kill his interest. And what would Scratha do when he found that out?
“She'll never leave the walls of myfortress , if I have anything to say about it,” Scratha said. “I want her to
stay alive.” His glare went to Lord Evkit, then back to the gathered lords.
“I want this held aside,” Lord Faer said sternly. “Your accusations against Lord Evkit and the teyanain
should be aired in Conclave. Just because you're on your bound land, my lord, does not mean you can
sidestep the laws of the desert.”
Scratha stared at the plump desert lord as if considering arguing the point, then shrugged. “I'll agree,” he
said, “if you'll hold him here for that time.”
For the first time, Lord Evkit showed anger. “You think I wouldrun? ”

Page 268

Scratha looked down at the small man from the whole of his towering height, managing to convey a sense
of utter scorn.
“Enough,” Lord Faer said hastily, and stepped between the two men as the teyanin lord visibly stiffened
with rage. “Hold it for Conclave, the both of you! I'll vouch for Evkit's honor, Scratha. You two stay
apart until this is brought up formally!”
Lord Evkit hissed, his glare pure venom, and turned away, his shoulders and lips tight.
“I have other business this night which isnot a matter for Conclave,” Lord Scratha said, turning his stare
on Pieas Sessin.
Pieas lifted his chin and sneered at Scratha, but a livid bruise on the side of his face and a haggard
puffiness under his eyes detracted from the attempt at arrogance.
“You asked for a chance to clear your name,” Lord Faer said before Pieas could speak. “Here is your
accuser, and several desert lords to hear your defense.”
“You promised me a hearing in Conclave!” Pieas said. His hands knotted into fists.
“I promised you a chance to defend yourself against the charges,” Lord Faer said with no trace of
uncertainty. “That doesn't have to be in Conclave. Tell your story.”
“I was being set up!” Pieas cried. “Lies, my lord, and manipulations. She had no basis for a challenge,
but nobody would believe me!”
“What were the charges, and what is your defense?”
Pieas wet his lips and glanced around at the faces watching him.
“I was accused of rape,” he said, “unfairly. The servant girl was a slut and threw herself at me. Lady
Alyea came around the corner, the girl started to fight, and the lady decided I was raping her. I believe it
was set up from the beginning, to put a bad name against me. The girl was a former servant of the lady;
how can you view her actions without suspicion?”
“Lady Alyea?” Faer said without a flicker of emotion in his voice or face. “How do you respond to that?”
Alyea had to admit that Pieas seemed utterly sincere, even to her newly sharp senses.
“I had no idea they were around that corner,” she said carefully. “I saw a struggle and separated them,
and the girl claimed he had been forcing her. She had marks of rough handling, and I know her character;
she's no slut. Pieas himself, when accused, did little more than sneer and swagger away, without the least
guilt or remorse. I brought the matter before the king, with Pieas and Lord Eredion Sessin in attendance,
and backed my charge with personal experience—”
“More lies!” Pieas cried, but his gaze darted away from Alyea as he spoke. “I never touched you!”
“Thatis a lie,” Lord Faer said immediately, a deep scowl forming on his face. “Don't be a fool. You're not
good enough to lie in front of this many desert lords.”
Pieas wet his lips again and glanced around.

Page 269

“Running now would be exceptionally stupid,” Lord Rest rumbled. “Hold still, boy.”
Alyea stared. Lord Faer hadn't challenged Pieas's earlier statement about Wian; did that mean it had
been true? She considered that for a moment, forcing herself to be fair, then said slowly, “I can speak to
Pieas Sessin's actions regarding myself, but on the other matter, I only know what I saw when I came
around that corner. I believed Wian when she told me it was rape. I still have a hard time believing she
could have acted as Pieas claims she did.”
“The girl came at me as I was returning to my rooms,” Pieas said. “She told me she found me handsome
and had long wished for my attentions. She was attractive; I wasn't inclined to put her aside if she was so
desperate to throw herself in my path. As soon as we were alone and I was roused, she sought to leave.
I'll admit I was losing my temper when Lady Alyea came round the corner, and I'd hit the whore once
already. She tried to claw at my eyes! I was defending myself.”
Alyea drew a deep breath, hearing absolute truth in Pieas' voice.
Lord Scratha's face remained stony. “And you had no knowledge of her previous to this?”
Pieas shook his head. He looked at Alyea directly and went on, his voice wavering: “I admit to and
apologize for my earlier offense. I used to experiment with—ah—exoticsubstances.” He looked away
and lifted his chin, straightening to a stiff posture. “I've made mistakes. I'll do what I can to make
amends.”
“When you fled from us at Sandsplit Village,” Lord Scratha said unexpectedly, “you left Wian behind.
Are you claiming you're not responsible for the state she was in?”
“Sandsplit!” Alyea said before she could stop herself. “She should be safe in Bright Bay!”
“She is now,” Scratha said without taking his attention from Pieas. “Answer the question!”
Pieas's lips thinned. “No,” he said at last, “I won't say that.” He swallowed and shifted in place. When he
went on, his voice had dropped to a near-whisper. “The people I used to deal with weren't pleased when
I decided to distance myself from them. I believe they sent the girl after me to cause a scene, and when it
wasn't as public as I think they wanted, they went looking for the girl . . . and left her in my apartments. I
woke in the middle of the night. . . .” He made a vague gesture with both hands. “She'd been badly
beaten. I knew nobody would believe I hadn't done anything to her. I couldn't leave her behind. I
decided to follow Scratha and convince the girl to tell him the truth. But she fought me the whole way,
screaming and clawing, and I had to restrain her with drugs and rope to make any speed.” He drew a
deep breath and rubbed at his face with his hands. “It wasn't pleasant.”
“You'll have us believe this entire accusation comes from the manipulations of a disgruntled potions
dealer?” Lord Rest said skeptically.
Pieas made a despairing motion with both hands. “It's thetruth . I know I haven't been the most admirable
person, my lords, but I've been trying to get free of my poor choices for months now. It's harder than I
expected.”
“Why did you decide to distance yourself from your former friends?” Lord Faer asked.
Pieas looked as if he'd rather sink beneath the sand than answer that question. After a long, flushed
moment, he said, barely audible, “My sister, Nissa.” He swallowed hard. “We've always been close. I

Page 270

could never refuse her anything if she leaned on me hard enough. She said she'd found someone she
wanted to marry, if he'd have her, and if he knew who she was . . . that she was related to me . . . I had
such a name that she didn't believe he would even look at her. She said she was going to have to lie
about who she was, just to get his attention. She begged me to clear my name, so that when her lie was
finally revealed, as she knew it would be, she could at least not have the shame of my behavior held
against her.”
Scratha's face held a grey tinge in the uncertain light.
“She swore to me that if I cost her this chance,” Pieas said, “she'd never speak to me again, and do her
damnedest to get me thrown from the family as a disgrace. I wouldn't have taken that from a single other
person walking this earth, but she's mysister. I'd die to keep her happy.” He raised a ferocious glare to
Scratha. The two stared at each other; and for the first time, Alyea thought Pieas looked the stronger
man.
Scratha looked away first, visibly shaken, but said nothing. Alyea didn't know what to believe. Everything
she remembered of Wian said the girl couldn't have been involved in any such scheme to disgrace the son
of a desert family, but she had heard no false notes in Pieas's voice. None of the desert lords seemed to
doubt his word, and even Deiq offered no objection.
She didn't envy Scratha his new knowledge, either. Nissa was obviously naive about politics. She had
apparently assumed Scratha's legendary hatred of Sessin Family came from her brother's disgraceful
antics, and sought no deeper for a reason.
Alyea met Pieas's gaze squarely. He almost quivered with tension and seemed more than a little sullen,
like an asp-jacau that had been kicked too many times by its master; but his stare ran clear and honest.
“I won't fight you, if you want to punish me for . . . for hurting you,” he said. “My mistakes are going to
follow me all my life, and damage those around me on the way. At least I've had a chance to clear my
name of the lies. That's all I wanted, for Nissa's sake.”
“Why did you run?” she demanded.
He grinned bitterly. “My own uncle was going to kill me. Nobody else would have defended me, once
that was said. I didn't want Nissa thinking that I'd broken my promise. Once I knew Scratha wasn't going
to listen to me, I decided to try my luck in the desert.”
“Did Eredion know you were telling the truth?” Alyea asked.
“He must have,” Pieas said, “he's a desert lord. You can't lie to a desert lord, can you?”
The silence that followed hung uncomfortably long.
“Youcan't,” Lord Scratha said at last, a subtle inflection aiming the words at Pieas. Alyea shot the tall
man a sharp look.
Pieas frowned, then shook his head. “Well, then, he must have known. But he chose to call me a liar, and
turn against me. I saw no option but to run and try to clear my name along the way.”
“How did you know I was headed east?” Scratha said. “The king told everyone I was going west, to the
Stone Islands.”

Page 271

Pieas snorted. “I knew before you cleared the perimeter of Bright Bay which way you were going, and
under what name.”
“I didn't put any of that in the note to the steward,” Scratha said. “Or speak to any but the king about it.”
“You didn't have to,” Alyea said. “Some of the King's Hidden have dual allegiances. Some are to
Sessin.”
Pieas grinned sourly. “I wasn't far behind you,” he said. “But that stupid girl slowed me down with her
kicking and wailing. I'd have caught up earlier if I hadn't been trying to convince her I wasn't the one who
attacked her. I never did succeed. Whatever they used on her drove her half out of her head, and I had
no way of curing it.”
Scratha shook his head, brooding, and said, “Apparently I should have waited to see if Yuer could get
sense out of her after all.”
Pieas grimaced. “I hope you didn't leave the girl with Yuer, Lord Scratha. That's like dropping a baby
chicken into a nest of hungry snakes.”
The silence hung for a moment, then Scratha, avoiding Alyea's glare, said, “Done is done. You're
innocent of the one charge and guilty of the other, it seems. You have a choice, Pieas. Alyea is in the
middle of the Sun-Lord's blood trial. You can wait until she completes this trial and face her under the
original blood challenge she issued, which means if you fall, you fall to a desert lord and your name goes
into permanent disgrace. Or you can step up to be the blood-sacrifice of the trial, and regain all honor.”
Alyea drew a deep breath, but Pieas, smiling strangely, spoke first. “I deserve death. Several times
over—and that's only for what I remember of past years. It would be a mercy. I'll never be free of my
mistakes, and at least this way my name will be clear. I'll only ask one thing in return.” His gaze went to
Scratha. “My lord . . . give my sister another chance. I've never seen Nissa so heartbroken before. Don't
hold her blame for my sins.”
“It never had anything to do with you,” Scratha said in a strangled voice.
Pieas looked honestly puzzled. “Then what?”
They all stared at him in silence for a moment. Lord Faer finally said, “Pieas, Scratha Family was
slaughtered, and Sessin refused aid. Every other desert family held out a hand save yours. You don't
know that?”
Pieas's face flushed. “I was told that Scratha refused our aid, alone of all the desert families—that we
weren't good enough for him to ally with.”
“I wasten ,” Scratha said into the astonished silence, “and grieving. Lord Sessin offered me help if I
agreed to conditions which would have given him control of my lands in all but name; of course I refused!
After that he had nothing for me.”
Alyea blinked, looking at Cafad Scratha more closely; she'd been assuming he was in his late thirties,
possibly even early forties. But as Scratha Fortress had been attacked somewhat less than twenty years
ago, if he'd been ten at the time, then he couldn't be above thirty.

Page 272

Pieas shook his head slowly, his expression clearing. “I'm sorry, Lord Scratha. I never knew that, but it
sounds like something Lord Arit would do. He was always looking to gain Sessin more power. But to
pressure a grieving child—that was wrong.”
“The sands are about to swallow us all,” Alyea said without meaning to put the thought into actual
speech. She covered her mouth with one hand, appalled at her timing.
Pieas turned, gave her a hard look, then shrugged and grinned ruefully. “I deserved that, I suppose.
Which brings me back to the point.” He reached to his belt, drew two long, slim daggers out, and
dropped them on the sand. He pulled two more from his boots and tossed them to the ground, then
another from a neck-sheath. Stepping away from the small pile of knives, he spread his hands and looked
at Alyea.
She stared back at him, feeling oddly paralyzed.
“Do it,” he said, and dropped gracefully to his knees, keeping his stare locked on her face.
“I don't. . . .” she started, not sure what to say.
“Gods know,” he said, “my life won't be any loss to the world.”
She drew a deep breath and looked around. The other lords had backed away a few steps, leaving a
clear ring of space around her; clearly, none of them intended to interfere. Even Deiq had stepped away
and watched her with absolutely no expression.
Pieas dropped his hands to his sides, curling them into fists.
“Out of all the people in this camp,” he said hoarsely, “I'm the most deserving of death right now.”
His clenched hands trembled.
A humorless, strained bark of laughter came from her throat. “I never thought I'd have any respect for
you.”
His grin looked forced. “Funny you should say that. I've always thought the same about myself. Best not
give me a chance to ruin it, don't you think?”
She drew another, long, steadying breath, and bent to pick up one of his knives.

Chapter Twenty-Five
Cafad had been gone for a long time when Riss opened her eyes and slowly pushed herself into a sitting
position. She stared at nothing for a while, seeming dazed. Eventually her gaze focused on the world
around her, and then on Idisio.
“That was . . . interesting,” she said hoarsely, and shut her eyes again.

Page 273

“Water?” Idisio offered, holding out a flask. She took it and drained the contents in one long steady swig.
“How long was I out?” she asked, handing him back the empty flask.
“I don't know,” Idisio said. He glanced up at the high windows, long since dark. A strange, steady glow
had filled the room at dusk; it rose from several alcoves along each wall and reminded Idisio of the odd
lighting in the Bright Bay palace dining hall.
He had prowled the room earlier, examining the alcoves, and found them hot enough at close range as to
discourage close inspection; but the alcoves seemed to be thin shafts cut down into the walls, and the
light came from beneath. Idisio guessed at a fire, somehow reflected upwards into the room, and amused
himself by thinking out possible ways that could be done.
“It's probably almost midnight by now.”
“Oh,” she said, looking relieved. “It's only been hours? That's good.”
He stared at her, astonished at the odd reply.
“Never mind,” Riss said. She rubbed her eyes. “Idisio. . . .”
The tone of her voice would have terrified him in the recent past. Now he found himself evaluating it,
calculating possibilities, comparing the tone to the motion of her hand and how her gaze slid awkwardly
away from him. He considered responses, decided on patient silence as the best path, and waited.
She drew a deep breath, another, and finally said, “I'm pregnant.”
“I never,” he said involuntarily.
She grinned, coughed half-laughter, and said, “No, stupid. Not yours. It's from when . . . back north.
Before I met you.”
“Oh,” he said, then, “Oh.”
“Yes. Oh.” She regarded him steadily, her expression sober but somehow content. “I thought I might be.
I hadn't had a chance to . . . prepare.” She looked away, a faint flush coming to her cheeks. “And by the
time I woke up . . . anyway, the ha'rethe confirmed it.”
“Oh,” Idisio said again, unable to come up with anything more coherent.
She shrugged a little, sighed, and looked up at him. “Do you think I'm a whore?”
“No,” he said, astonished. “No, nothing like that.”
“Do you—”
“Wait.” Idisio cut her off with a gesture and tilted his head, listening to distant sounds. “Someone's
coming. Cafad. And he's not alone. Two others.”
She rubbed at her face with both hands and raked her hair into a semblance of order. Idisio watched,

Page 274

mulling over what she'd told him, and found himself glad of the interruption. He didn't know what to say
to her, didn't know the right response to make. He had an uncomfortable feeling that she wanted to hear
that he liked her, or thought she was beautiful, or something equally soppy.
Words bounced from the stone walls, muddied into incoherence by the echoes, then clarified as they
moved into the passageway outside the room; one voice held a female timbre, and the third set Idisio's
arms into gooseflesh. He stood up just as the door swung open.
Cafad strode into the room, followed by a man and a woman. The woman stood almost as tall as the
desert lord, with glossy dark hair that hung, unbound, well past her shoulders. Dark eyes, olive-tan skin,
and the stern pride in her carriage marked her as having at least some measure of noble blood, although it
probably came from a Bright Bay, not a desert Family, line. At a second glance, Idisio read tremendous
weariness and a deep grief beneath the surface. She seemed ready to drop where she stood. Only
willpower kept her on her feet.
The man whose voice worried Idisio stood slightly taller than the woman, with a darker skin and broader
face. His expression, at the moment, held as much bleak and powerful bitterness as Cafad's madness had
ever produced. Idisio suspected that he never wanted to see this man upset, not even a little; but here,
too, a second glance showed more. Something weirdly familiar and at the same time frighteningly alien
glittered in those dark eyes. Idisio found himself backing away. “It's all right, Idisio,” Cafad said. “This
is—”
I am named De'sta'haiq, a quiet voice said, just audible.
“—Deiq, and Lord Alyea—” Cafad's voice echoed over the words in Idisio's head.
Deiq is simpler, the voice agreed, and the man smiled.
“Gah,” Idisio said, and backed up again.
“—Idisio?” Cafad stepped forward, stretching out a reassuring hand. “What's the matter?”
“He's never met another ha'ra'ha before,” the man said easily, still smiling.
“Of course not,” Cafad said, looking thoroughly chagrined. “I should have remembered that. Idisio, I'm
sorry, it's been . . . a bit hectic the last few hours.”
“I would like to pay my respects, if I may,” Deiq said, “and Lord Alyea needs to rest.”
“Of course,” Cafad said. “Riss, come with us; you'll be attending to Lord Alyea. Idisio, guide Deiq
wherever he wishes to go. He has full access to the fortress; no door is closed to a ha'ra'ha.”
“Gods,” the woman said, wearily sardonic, “you're letting me out of your sight, Deiq?”
“You're safe here,” the dark man said. “Go get some rest. If you need me, just call my name. I'll hear
you.”
She quirked an eyebrow, shook her head, and followed Cafad from the room, Riss trailing behind. Idisio
wanted nothingless than to be alone in a room with Deiq, but Cafad swept out of the room too fast for
protest. Idisio tried to think of an excuse to leave, and came up blank. Deiq watched him with an amused
expression. “Most of us grow up knowing what we are, in the company of our own kind and kin,” he

Page 275

said. “You seem to have had an unusual life.”
Idisio felt his face flare into bright, mortified color.
“Scratha didn't tell me details,” Deiq said. “He said you needed instruction, nothing more. Excuse me.”
He walked to within an arm's length of the pool and sank to his knees. He sat that way, head bowed, for
several minutes. Idisio watched, fascinated, as a faint mist formed above the surface of the water. As if
subject to a localized breeze, the mist swirled into patterns that looked almost like writing for a few
moments, then slowly dissipated.
Deiq drew a deep breath and stood, turning to face Idisio; incredibly, tears streaked down that imposing,
dark face.
“Scratha has no idea,” Deiq said, “how lucky he is. Neither do you.” He shook his head and walked
away from the now-quiet pool, motioning Idisio to follow him.
Deiq moved through the silent passageways as though entirely familiar with the fortress. At that thought,
Idisio realizedhe knew the halls they walked, knew when a door or turn in the passage lay ahead. He
could have found his way to the kitchens, storerooms, main hall, and more: as if he had lived here all his
life.
He stopped and rubbed at his eyes, feeling disoriented. Deiq paused, waiting patiently. After a moment
Idisio said, “I . . . feel like I know this place. It's weird.”
“You'll never be lost,” Deiq said, “with a friendly ha'rethe around.” He smiled and started walking again.
Abruptly aware he had no value as a guide, Idisio grimaced and followed. He wondered if Cafad had
known that Deiq didn't need a guide and, if not, whether he should say anything about it.
“Friendly?” Idisio said after a few steps.
Deiq made a humming noise in the back of his throat. “One of the great myths about them is that they're
all the same: emotionless, interested only in their own survival, and without personality or preferences. It's
an understandable mistake, given how little contact even the desert lords have with them.”
Idisio felt a burst of excitement. “Is that why I couldn't stand being around that one at the Wall,” he said,
“but the one here was all right?”
Deiq paused again and looked at Idisio with a curiously intent expression on his face.
“The one at the Wall?” he repeated.
Idisio told him the story, cutting it to a brief and relatively dry account.
“Ah,” Deiq said, and resumed walking. “That's another mistake humans make, one that I think is rather
less forgivable than the first. They assume that every voice in a dark place is a ha'rethe.”
Idisio had been walking slightly behind Deiq; now he moved to walk beside him. “It wasn't? Then what
was it?”
Deqi's expression remained serene as he said, “It's been over a thousand years since the original
Agreement, and the ha'reye were old then. How many do you think are still alive?”

Page 276

“Good gods,” Idisio breathed, stunned. “I never thought about that.”
“Most people don't,” Deiq said. “There were about a hundred ha'reye left when the first Agreement was
made. Today, I'm guessing there are probably fewer than twenty still alive. One of those lives under this
fortress. Most of the Families think they have ha'rethe but what they actually have protecting them is a
first generation ha'ra'ha. Sometimes it's even a second generation ha'ra'ha. Nobody lower than that could
pull it off— they're too weak. Too human.”
“So what I met at the Wall was a ha'ra'ha?” Idisio said, intensely relieved and not sure why.
“More than likely,” Deiq said. “Probably first generation.” He paused and cleared his throat. “I'd advise
against you going anywhere near the Wall again until you're fully trained, Idisio. Some of the first
ha'ra'hain . . . it's complicated.”
He turned into a side corridor, sharply, as if he'd made the decision to do so at the last second. Idisio
almost bumped into him.
“We both ought to rest. I'll have to finish talking to you later. Go find your friend Riss. She needs you
right now.”
“Shewhat ?” Idisio said involuntarily.
Deiq increased his pace until Idisio had to jog to keep up. “Trust me. Go.”
They came to a cross-passage which Idisio instantly knew led to the honored guest quarters. Deiq took it
without pause or farewell. Idisio stood silent, watching the tall man hurry down the passage, and chewed
on his tongue. He'd finally started getting some of the answers he needed. Deiq's abrupt departure felt
like a splash of winter-cold water on a hot day.
You'll have time to talk, the ha'rethe said unexpectedly.He's right. Go see her.
“Is she all right?” Idisio said out loud, suddenly worried, and started jogging again. He realized he could
feel her presence in the servant's quarters. Cafad must have assigned her a room; she was probably
unpacking or resting there. What could be wrong with that?
Go see her, the ha'rethe repeated.
“For what?” Idisio said, still speaking out loud; stubbornly reluctant to use any form of telepathy.
Humans, the ha'rethe sighed, and fell silent.

Riss was crying. He could feel her distress. He hesitated, considering whether to knock. As he dithered,
the thin door seemed to shift slightly; now it hung open just a little.
“You don't have to push,” Idisio muttered under his breath. He received no answer.

Page 277

He nudged the door just enough to slip through, and shut it behind him without making a noise. He didn't
know if that silence came from his own skill, the light weight of the door, or the ha'rethe.
Riss lay curled up on the low bed, hugging a large red pillow; her thin body shook with muffled sobs.
Idisio watched her for a moment, uncertain whether to retreat or advance, and finally moved forward. He
sat gingerly on the edge of the bed, half-expecting her to lash out.
Instead, he wound up, as he had once before, with her arms around his neck and her head on his
shoulder. At least she wasn't entirely on top of him this time. He shifted awkwardly, trying to get her
elbow out of his ribs, and somehow the movement ended with his back against the headboard and Riss
firmly in his lap again.
He grimaced ruefully, eased her into a comfortable position, and stroked her hair lightly as she cried
herself out.
“What's the matter?” he said when her sobbing hiccups had slowed.
“Let's see,” she said in a thick voice, not lifting her head from his shoulder. “I'm hundreds of miles from
home, disgraced, pregnant, alone, terrified, surrounded by more strangers than I've met in my entire life,
and I have no idea what's going to happen to me. There's a weird creature that spent several days talking
to me, but it was really only hours, and some of the things it told me scared me about to pissing myself.
Nothing's wrong. Why would you think anything's wrong?”
Idisio, at first taken aback, found himself grinning by the time she finished. If Riss could be that sharp,
she'd be all right.
“Let's see,” he said into her hair. “You're on a grand adventure, earning respect from everyone you meet
and learning lots of new things. And, yes, you're pregnant, with a desert lord ready and willing to support
every need you and the child might have. You've met and befriended one of the oldest and most sacred
creatures in the world, and it shared some amazing secrets with you. You're right; I don't think anything's
wrong.”
She lifted her head and glared at him. “You're impossible.”
He shrugged, still smiling. “My version is as valid as yours.”
She wiped her face with a shaky hand and sat up a little straighter. “I keep thinking Karic's going to show
up around some corner unexpectedly and laugh at me, and tell everybody that I'm a whore. . . .”
Idisio abruptly felt a phantom surge of thick, salty water filling his throat, and an almost overwhelming,
thrashing panic. It passed in moments, and he coughed hard to clear his throat.
“I don't think . . . you need to worry about that,” he muttered, his stomach churning. “Damn, this is going
to take some getting used to.”
“What is?”
He shook his head, unwilling to share his vision of Karic's death. “Nothing. I guess I'm a little rattled by
everything too. Look, you're the servant of a desert lord now. If they even show up, Cafad's liable to
have them strung up for what they did to you. Don't worry about them any more.”
She sighed. “Thank you. I've been so scared. . . .”

Page 278

The words trailed off into silence. When her breathing evened into true sleep, Idisio carefully eased her
back down onto the bed and slipped out the door with an immense sense of relief.

Chapter Twenty-Six
The fortress seemed to breathe around Alyea; the air currents moved in strange patterns here.
Sometimes it felt as though an invisible eye watched everything that went on within the walls. Alyea
couldn't decide whether that comforted or terrified her.
She lay on the wide, low bed, staring up at the ceiling, unable to sleep. Lord Scratha's servant had
shown her to a room and withdrawn with hardly a word; there seemed something tremendously strained
in the girl's manner. Alyea hadn't felt up to handling someone else's troubles, so she had let Riss go
without pressing her to talk. Now she wondered if she had made the right decision.
Blood darkening the sand at her feet. . . .
She shut her eyes and covered them with her hands, wishing that could erase the image. Her stomach
rolled heavily. She moaned, more miserable than she could remember ever having been in her life. Even
the horror of Ethu's death paled before the bleak fact of having become a murderer herself.
Exhaustion dragged at every muscle and nerve; she'd expected to be asleep as soon as she lay down.
But every time she relaxed that moment came back to her, destroying her peace of mind more effectively
than a physical attack.
It should have been easy. It should have been simple. He'd said himself that he deserved death. Nobody
had moved to stop her, not even Scratha.
But ithadn'tbeen easy, or simple, and the silence from the watching lords had been oppressive, not
friendly. Had she made the right choice? What if the opportunity to kill Pieas had really been a test to see
if she couldrefuse to take a life? What if, after all, she had failed? What if she'd missed some vital clue,
some way to get out of the situation without killing anyone?
Nobody had spoken afterwards. Scratha gathered the body into his arms and disappeared around the far
side of the fortress without a word, and everyone just waited, silent and expressionless. Not looking at
each other; not looking at her.
The surrounding darkness seemed like a live thing, writhing to attack her, held back only by the
torchlight. Alyea had broken into a cold sweat by the time Scratha returned.
Discussion remained minimal even then: Scratha formally invited Alyea and Deiq into the fortress. The
other lords bowed, excused themselves, and returned to the camp. Pieas's death hadn't been referred to
again, as if, once over, it had never happened; as if Pieas had never actually existed in the first place.
The room swayed gently around her. Alyea sat up and curled forward, hugging her knees to stop the

Page 279

trembling in her hands. None of this had gone as expected. Not that she'd had any clear idea of what
would happen once the last blood trial ended, but she'd never expected this wrenching, dizzying nausea,
this unsteady balancing on the edge of a bottomless chasm of guilt.
She felt a faint movement nearby, and then Deiq sat down beside her.
“Alyea,” he said. “Look at me. Please.”
She kept her face pressed into her knees, afraid to face him, sure he meant to tell her she'd made a
dreadful mistake. If she looked at him, met those dark eyes, she'd see it, she'd know he'd lost all respect
for her and thought of her as nothing more than a vengeful whore.
“No,” he said sharply, and gripped her upper arms hard. “Stop that!”
Of course; as a ha'ra'ha, he could probably read her mind. He'd likely been doing it all along, using
Alyea's weakness to manipulate her into doing what he wanted. She'd been a tool, a toy, pushed this way
by one and that way by another, and she'd be discarded soon; she'd become only an inconvenience now,
but one too strong to be tolerated.
Deiq cursed softly, tangled his hands in her hair, and hauled her head up. The pain of her hair being pulled
that hard forced her eyes open. She reached up to bat his hands away just as he released her hair and
splayed his hands on either side of her face, thumbs under her chin to keep her still. Unable to move her
head, she found herself staring directly into his eyes.
“Alyea ,stop it.”
She inhaled sharply, shocked at his tone as much as at the mad glitter in his eyes. The gentle, amused
veneer had vanished completely; the visage in front of her, at the moment, would give the strongest desert
lord pause.
“Good,” he said, although his tautness didn't relax in the least. “I'd rather have you scared. That's easier
to deal with. Take another breath, a good deep one.”
She drew in another breath, and another, her gaze locked helplessly on his unyielding expression; and
abruptly burst into tears.
“That's better,” he said, sounding relieved, and his hands softened. She found herself leaning forward
against him. He pulled her into his arms, cradling her like a child, and said nothing while she sobbed
helplessly.
When her breath started to hitch painfully, he pressed a large hand gently between her breasts and held it
there. A sense of warmth spread through her chest; the sobs eased and her breathing slowly evened
again.
“I shouldn't have left you alone,” Deiq said quietly. “I'm sorry.”
She moved her head side to side in faint negation, not understanding the apology.
“You need to rest, Alyea.”
“Can't sleep,” she mumbled. “Blood on the sand. . . .”

Page 280

He drew in a hard breath, as if he'd seen the image in her mind. “Damn,” he said, “Iam an idiot
sometimes. Listen to me, Alyea: you shed blood on a ha'rethe's land, and you're not comfortable in your
own mind that you did right. Even though the bound lord approved, the protector of the land is going to
make you accept what you've done before it lets you rest. Your agonizing is aggravating the ha'rethe. Do
you understand? Alyea?”
“Tired. . . .” she whispered, closing her eyes. “So tired.”
“I know,” he said. “Do you think you did right?”
“I don't know,” she said. “Do you?”
“I can't answer that.”
“More stupid rules,” she muttered, and forced her eyes open. “I don't know. Yes. No. I don't know that
I had a choice. No, there's always a choice, isn't there?” She sighed, letting the words trail off into a
halfcoherent mumble, then made herself go on. “I wish I hadn't. But that won't change anything; it's done.
And I'd do the same thing again, if I had the same choice in front of me.”
Her eyelids slid shut.
“Iwould do't 'gain,” she mumbled. “Di'righ.”
The bloody sand image wavered and faded like smoke on a strong wind.
“I think that's good enough,” Deiq said. “You can rest now.”
“Oh, good,” she said, or thought she did; words faded away into a thick softness.

Emptiness eased into form, and consciousness slid in around the edges of her vision. She lay still, eyes
closed, and became nobody for a time. Memory intruded; she allowed it reluctantly and watched, still
hazy, as pieces of her life built themselves back into structures of behavior and personality.
Alyea sighed and opened her eyes, grateful that the dizzy, numb feeling had faded into simple exhaustion.
She still felt tired, but it wasn't the overwhelming sensation it had been.
A broad band of sunlight lay across the far side of the room; she had no idea whether it signified morning
or afternoon. The room held the cool of early morning, but that might be deceptive.
Deiq lay sprawled on the wide bed beside her. She'd never seen him so relaxed before; his breathing
held the deep hoarseness of complete exhaustion. Alyea realized for the first time that he'd been pushing
himself even harder than he'd pushed her. She admitted to herself that she hadn't wanted to see any
weakness in Deiq, but decided he'd also probably concealed his weariness; Deiq's pride would never let
him sag and yawn in public.
As she studied Deiq's slack face, Alyea wonderedwhy he had taken such an interest in her. Whatever

Page 281

their relationship, Eredion Sessin couldn't possibly be so concerned about one person's welfare as to ask
a ha'ra'ha to follow her around. And Deiq tended to present himself as hard-edged and manipulative, but
someone like that wouldn't have agreed to Eredion's request—or fallen so trustingly asleep beside her.
More questions; no answers in sight. She'd have to be patient, which had always been her least favorite
activity.
Careful not to disturb him, she sat up and edged back to lean against the wall. With nowhere in particular
she wanted to go and nobody she cared to speak with at the moment, there seemed little point in getting
up. She'd certainly be notified of dinner, or the start of Conclave, or anything else of importance which
concerned her.
Alyea rested her shoulders against smooth, cool stone and contented herself with watching a ha'ra'ha
sleep.
The band of sunlight shifted as she sat, moving, little by little, away from the far wall and towards the bed.
She'd never studied how long it took for that to happen, but she guessed at least an hour, maybe two,
had passed by the time the warm golden light lapped at the foot of the bed and Deiq woke up.
Before he even opened his eyes, he put out a hand to the place where she had been, and found only
empty space; she'd long since drawn her legs up close to her. With a startled grunt, he rolled to his side,
his eyes wide. Seeing her, he relaxed and drew a deep, shuddering breath.
“I'm not going anywhere,” she said.
Deiq propped himself up on one elbow and looked up at her, pushing his long hair out of his face. He
didn't speak for a long moment, seemingly content just to study her.
“How do you feel?” he said at last.
“Much better,” she said. “Did you get enough rest?”
“For the moment,” he said. “I'll need to rest some more after the Conclave is over. Lord Scratha has
offered us unlimited hospitality—a rare gift.”
She decided, rather coldly, to take advantage of his lingering vulnerability and press for answers. “Your
merchanting business won't suffer from the time you're spending away from it?”
He winced a little, his gaze sharpening. “I have good managers. They handle most of the work already;
I'm almost a figurehead.”
“How old are you?”
He blinked at her, a frown forming, and didn't answer.
“I'm guessing over a hundred years,” she said.
His mouth quirked. “That's a conservative guess. Leave it at that.”
“And in all that time,” she said, “how many times before this have you fallen in love?”
“Damn it,” he said, and rolled onto his back.

Page 282

She waited, studying the dust motes whirling through the sunbeams.
“None,” he said finally.
She looked down at his bleak expression. “You weren't supposed to help me this much, were you?”
“No.” He sat up. After running his large hands through his hair for a few moments, he said, “I was only
supposed to make sure you got to the fortress safely. To kill Chac if he threatened your safety.”
“Why didn't you?”
He made a vague, helpless gesture, still not meeting her gaze. “I just . . . couldn't.”
“You couldn't kill Chac?”
“I'm not a Callen of the Sun-Lord,” he said. “I don't consider killing a good way to handle most
problems. I thought I could do better by rearranging your trials to help you survive what he had planned.”
He made another vague gesture and offered her a pained smile. “It's worked out, in the end.”
She drew a deep breath. “No. It hasn't, actually. You've made me a desert lord without a family,” she
said, her throat tight. The words came out hoarse and more than a little bitter. “I doubt Lord Scratha will
stretch so far as to name me honorary family, and I don't think I'd want that. You've given me power with
no way to use it, Deiq. What am I supposed to do now? I can't go home; they'd never take me back. Do
you think I'll follow you around the southlands like some baby bird and share your bed? You can't be
that stupid.”
As she spoke, his face slowly became a hard, expressionless mask.
“No,” he said. “I wasn't . . . thinking, I suppose. I didn't see it quite that way.”
Alyea hesitated, then said, “I'm not saying I don't like you, Deiq. But you've pushed me around to suit
yourself with never a thought for the ending, and now I'm stuck between two worlds with no bridge
between. It's not a comfortable spot.”
“This isn't quite the way I wanted events to happen,” he said, staring at his hands.
“I'm sure you had a wonderfully romantic ending in mind,” she said, and found herself laughing.
He glanced up at her, frowning, plainly hurt. She waved her hands in the air and shook her head.
“I'm not making fun of you,” she said when she had her breath back. “This is all so absurd, Deiq—it's
like something out of a bard song. And it's just so silly, thinking of you with candles and roses and
romance; that's not how you are at all. It certainly wouldn't have impressed me a bit.”
His frown slowly lifted and changed to a rueful look.
Sensing an opportunity for an unguarded answer, she asked, “How true are the rumors about you
bedding your way to power?”
He hesitated, then said, “I started most of those rumors myself. It was something humans could
understand, something that turned their eyes from any other explanation for my influence.”

Page 283

“But not all,” she said.
“Any good rumor has to have a grain of truth to it.”
“Chac said once,” Alyea said, not at all sure she should bring this up, “that rumor called Pieas your son.”
Deiq shook his head. “No truth to that one. Lady Sessin started that one herself, I think, to see if she
could tweak her husband's temper a bit. She's a strange one.”
Alyea let out a breath of relief. “What's that grain of truth you mentioned?”
He let out a hard, frustrated breath, obviously wishing he'd never said that aloud. For a moment, she
thought he wouldn't answer, but then he shrugged and said, “One of the first problems new desert lords
usually have to face, and ha'ra'hain live with all their lives, is the . . . there are changes in . . . in your . . .
drive. Your desires.” He made a brief gesture near his lap. “It's higher than in normal humans. You're not
feeling it yet, because you're still healing. That's why you have to be in a safely sequestered place after the
trial of Ishrai. To avoid . . . problems.” He shook his head and rubbed his hands over his face. “I didn't
want that to influence your decision. I made Acana promise not to tell you. She said I was being a fool.”
“She was right,” Alyea said tartly. “Howcould you have held that back?” Not giving him a chance to
answer, she swung her legs over the side of the bed. She didn't want to be anywhere near him at the
moment. “I'm going for a walk. Leave me alone.”
The door was too light to slam properly, but she did her best.

She could still feel the eerie breathing sensation around her as she stormed through the passages of the
fortress. It didn't frighten her any longer; at the moment, she doubted a nest of sand-asps in her path
would have slowed her stride.
Obviously, he'd hoped for her to fall easily into his bed and never question it as anything other than true
attraction to him. She never should have thought of trusting him.
That's not true, said a voice in her head. It sounded old, and oddly accented; and although nobody had
mentioned this possibility, she knew the voice came from a ha'rethe.
She let her pace slow to half of what it had been, to avoid crashing into a wall while she sorted out how
to talk to this thing. Tentatively, she focused a thought:How do you know?
It doesn't actually take much effort to speak to me, the creature said.If you shout, someone else might
hear you. There are several sensitive people here now. And I know because he asked me what to do.
He's very attached to you; I find that surprising. Ha'ra'hain do not normally hold any human in high
regard. This one prefers spending time among humans, and being involved in your politics and problems,
which is admirable from a human point of view and rather useless from ours.
A thoughtful pause followed. Alyea didn't try to speak, sensing it would be an interruption.

Page 284

At last the voice resumed:I have asked the young ha'ra'ha you call Idisio to look into some problems in
the northlands. If you are willing to travel, I would like you to go with him. He is still very young, and
needs guidance.
Alyea stopped in the middle of a stride and stood balancing on one foot for a moment, her mouth hanging
open. “Why me?”
You are, as you recently said, a desert lord without a family. You have no ties holding you to any lands.
You are strong, and learn quickly, and can give the young one good guidance.
Alyea slowly lowered her foot to the ground and stood still, frowning at nothing.I'm bound to Deiq for a
year , she said.Does that mean he has to come along too?
A young ha'ra'ha must have the guidance of an elder, either ha'rethe or ha'ra'ha. He will serve two
purposes: teaching you, and teaching the young one. The arrangement has been paid for, and cannot be
undone.
“Paid for?” she said aloud, startled.
The one you call Deiq paid the price for changing the arrangement. You cannot go to the Qisani or any
other source of learning; you must learn from him.
“What was the price?” Speaking aloud seemed to work perfectly well; and at least this way she didn't
worry about someone “sensitive” overhearing.
That is a question you must ask him. I will not answer.
She drew a deep breath. “All right. I'll go with Idisio to the northlands.”
Thank you.
“You're welcome.” She sighed and turned around to head back to her rooms.
Deiq stood several yards back, leaning against one wall, arms crossed. He watched her with an
unapologetic, dark stare as she marched towards him.
“I told you to leave me alone,” she said when she drew close.
“I did,” he said. “I moved quietly and didn't speak to you. You didn't know I was here until you turned
around.”
“You said this place was safe. You could have let me walk unsupervised.”
“No,” he said without visible emotion. “My duty is to stay with you at all times. I shouldn't have let you
be alone before, and I won't make that mistake again. When the ha'rethe was trying to talk to you about
what happened with Pieas, you could have gone mad if I hadn't gotten there in time to explain what was
happening. I neglected my responsibility. I won't do that twice.”
She nodded, conceding the point.
“Do you want to keep walking?” he said. “I'll stay back out of your way, if you'd like to go on stomping
around the halls.”
She stiffened, started to snap at him, then once again found herself laughing. “It is a bit silly, isn't it?”

Page 285

He nodded, a faint smile twitching the corners of his mouth.
“Is there somewhere to sit and talk?”
“There's a courtyard not far away,” he said, and led the way.

The sweet scent of desert roses and the dry, dusty smell of desert palms filled the air. Gravel and sand
crunched quietly underfoot. A cactus warbler fled from its shelter in a flowering shrub as they walked by.
The sun laid a dappled pattern on the ground, screened by the wide leaves arching far overhead; the
only solid patch of light glittered on a shallow pool of water in the center of the courtyard. Alyea chose a
bench by the pool and sat, Deiq settling down beside her without a word. She stared at the placid water
for a while: remembering a cool, stone cavern and flickering oil-lamps, contrasting it with the warm,
peaceful atmosphere here.
“What was the price for you to be my mentor instead of the Qisani ha'rethe?” she said finally.
Deiq made a small, pained noise. “I had to swear under the binding oaths of blood and fire to stay with
you until your training was complete,” he said. “Onlywith you. Do you understand?”
“Whether I share your bed or not?”
He snorted. “I should remember by now that tact isn't your strong point.”
“We're well matched, then,” she said, “because you can't seem to say anything straight out unless I twist
your arm round twice.” She couldn't help prodding that sore spot. “So you're willing to be celibate for a
year?”
“You still don't understand,” Deiq said. He picked up a small piece of gravel, rolled it into his palm, and
clenched his fist around it. Alyea heard a faint crunching noise. Deiq slowly opened his hand to reveal
several fragments.
Alyea realized she'd been holding her breath. She let it out in a long hiss.
Deiq tilted his hand and let the pieces fall to the ground. “You're still human,” he told her. “You'll never
get that strong—but bone's a lot softer than rock. Andyou won't be able to hold celibate for a year, once
you heal.”
Alyea shut her eyes, feeling ill.
“Restraint has to become as much a part of you as breathing,” he said. “You have tolearnthat kind of
restraint. Do I really need to explain further?”
“No,” she said after a moment. “No, I don't think so.” She stood and slowly paced around the
courtyard. Deiq stayed on the bench and watched her, his expression pained.

Page 286

“I know it won't help,” he said, “but I'm sorry. I realized at the Qisani that I'd made a very bad mistake,
pushing you into this. I let the politics of the human world and my own . . . feelings override the safety of
a potential desert lord, and that's unforgivable.”
She stopped at the edge of the pool and stared into the clear water for some time without speaking. A
few wide-leafed water plants floated on the surface, and insects buzzed on translucent wings from flower
to flower. No fish appeared, and she wondered absently if Scratha would be stocking the pool any time
soon.
“The ha'rethe wants me to go north with Idisio,” she said at last. “It wants to find out why the ha'ra'hain
are meddling in human affairs. I agreed to go. You'll be teaching both of us.”
“Thanks for consulting me before you made that decision,” he said.
“As much as you ever consulted me,” she shot back. She turned to face him. “Are you going or not?”
“I don't have much choice, if you've already agreed to a ha'rethe's task,” he said. “It won't take kindly to
my trying to refuse now.”
She found herself grinning at him with no real amusement behind the expression. “Think of the trip as
penance for your many mistakes. After all, if it weren't for you I wouldn't even be a desert lord, and you
wouldn't have to tag my heels for the next year.”
Deiq opened his mouth, looking indignant; then rose and moved to stand in front of her. “Alyea, you're
stuck with me at your side, like it or not.”
His tone turned harsh and cold. Alyea forced herself not to flinch at the change.
“Done is done. Let go of what was and look at right now. I can't teach you anything if you're fighting me.
If you want to walk away after I'm done, I won't stop you. But damned if I'll let you walk without
properly training you. Let me do my job, even the parts you may not like.”
He paused, studying her. She stared back at him, caught between anger and astonishment.
“And if I'm lucky,” he went on more softly, “you'll forgive me when I'm through, and think more kindly of
me. But if not, at least I'll have trained another desert lord, and a damned good one at that. I'll consider
that enough.”
Her anger had drained away by the time he finished speaking, and she felt a surge of compassion for him.
In love for the first time in a long life, but forced by his own errors in judgment to hold himself at an
emotional distance; he would be miserable no matter what she did.
She suddenly found herself with a new awareness and respect for Deiq's willpower. Accepting Oruen's
rejection had been terribly difficult for her, and she'd never questioned her subordinate status. How much
worse must the coming months look to the proud ha'ra'ha? By agreeing to travel north without consulting
Deiq on the matter, she'd just forced him to followher lead, not the other way around.
“I'm sorry,” she said, and meant it.
He nodded. With a brisk gesture as though to say:let's move on to more important things, he said,
“There's a banquet tonight. I've asked for us to be seated at the lower end of the table, away from Lord
Scratha.”

Page 287

She considered that. The placement made a certain amount of sense. Lord Scratha wouldn't want her
near his hand to remind him that his guests had tried to put an easily controlled usurper in his place.
“Lords Evkit and Rowe of Sessin,” Deiq said, “will be seated below us, at the very end.”
Alyea nodded slowly. That made sense, too, although she didn't look forward to conversing with either
one.
“I suggest,” Deiq said, stressing the word only slightly, “that you avoid antagonizing either man. I think
Lord Scratha would appreciate that.”
“I was thinking the same thing,” Alyea said.
“Lord Evkit respects you,” Deiq said. “I suggest you cultivate that. Lord Rowe will follow Evkit's lead.”
“How?”
“You're resourceful, creative, and strong-willed,” Deiq said with only the faintest trace of irony. “I'm sure
you'll find a way.”

Chapter Twenty-Seven
“Riss is pregnant.”
Cafad shrugged and turned another page. Someone had carefully wiped the table and shelves of the
library free of dust, and the room felt indefinably more awake, more alive; a faint smell of oranges and
cinnamon hung in the air.
The book Cafad studied didn't look like the same one Idisio had “found” for him; this one bulked twice
as thick and much broader across, occupying a good third of the large table. Idisio eyed the book with
respectful envy, knowing the words within likely stood far beyond his still-developing skills to interpret.
There hadn't been much chance to practice of late.
“You knew?” Idisio said, looking back to Cafad.
“Of course I knew,” Cafad said. “I told her it was likely, given the timing.” He sighed and straightened,
rubbing his neck.
“What timing?”
Cafad gave Idisio a long, level stare. “Her moon cycle, Idisio.” Idisio felt his face heat rapidly to crimson
embarrassment. “Oh. You asked her about—? I mean. . . .” He bit his tongue to stop more inanities from
emerging.

Page 288

The desert lord shook his head, looking amused.
“I'm going north,” Idisio blurted, suddenly desperate to change the subject.
Cafad tilted an eyebrow expressively.
“—oh. You know that too?”
“Yes. Lord Alyea and Deiq will be traveling with you.”
“Oh.”
“Riss will stay here.”
Idisio opened and closed his mouth a few times, finally managing: “Oh. Good.” The last word came out
sounding far too much like a question.
“I have a favor to ask.” Cafad pointed to a nearby chair. “Please. Sit.”
Idisio pulled the chair around and sat, then tried to duplicate the eyebrow twitch the desert lord used
when waiting for someone to speak. Cafad smiled. Many of the wear lines on the man's face seemed to
have smoothed out over the past few hours, as if a tremendous strain had been released. Now helooked
twenty-eight, instead of forty-eight.
“I want you to take a letter to the king when you leave.”
“All right.” Idisio didn't relish the thought of facing King Oruen again, without Scratha's direct presence as
backing. He chewed the inside of one cheek and tried to tell himself he'd handle that audience with
dignity and confidence.
He almost had himself convinced when Scratha said, “I also want you to take over as King's
Researcher.”
Idisio's jaw dropped open. “Youwhat? ”
“I can't leave the grounds any longer,” Cafad said. “Being fully bound apparently has a drawback: since
the ha'rethe can't protect me from a distance, it won't let me leave the area. The research assignment,
even though it was meant to get me out of the way, actually does need doing. I'd be grateful if you'd carry
it through for me. You can even take the name I chose to travel under if you like, to keep the appearance
of obedience alive. No reason to annoy the king by making him look a fool.”
Idisio stared at the desert lord, unable to think of anything coherent to say. “I can't even write,” he said
finally.
“You're learning fast,” Cafad said. “Deiq and Alyea can continue teaching you.”
“But,” Idisio started, then shook his head helplessly.
“Will you do it?”
Idisio couldn't think of any reason to refuse. “Yes,” he said, wishing he could justify ano .

Page 289

“Thank you.” Cafad looked back at the book. “Is there anything else you want to talk to me about?”
“Um,” Idisio said. “Riss is staying?”
“She's pregnant,” Cafad said without looking up. “It's not safe for her to travel with you.”
“Does she know that she's staying?”
“Not yet,” Cafad said. “She doesn't know you're leaving, either. Do you want me to tell her?”
Idisio really wished he could sayyes to that question. “No. I'd better do it. Thanks for offering.”
“Mm-hnn.” Cafad glanced up, his expression politely blank. “Anything else?”
Idisio shook his head, sighed, and left the room.

“You'rewhat ?” Riss said not long after that. “I'm going.”
“No,” Idisio said, forcing himself to meet her eyes directly. “You're staying. Lord Scratha's orders.”
“I'm not his slave! He can't tell me what to—” She stopped, her gaze suddenly unfocused. “Why?”
She seemed to be addressing the air around her. Idisio shut his eyes and grimaced.
“But,” she said after a few moments. “He can't. . . .” She fell silent again, frowning. “Oh, all right.” She
looked at Idisio.
“The ha'rethe?” he guessed.
“Yes.” She stood and paced the room, her steps jerky and restless, then moved to stand in front of him.
“All right. I'll stay, and you'll go. But you'll come back.”
It sounded like an order.
“Yes,” he said. “As soon as I can.”
“Fine.” She turned her back on him. “Go away. I want to be alone.”
Idisio stood, drew a deep breath, and walked towards her instead. He put his hands on her taut
shoulders from behind.
“Riss,” he said into her ear. She didn't move.
He summoned all his courage, heart pounding in his throat, and put his arms around her waist. He let his
hands rest over her stomach and his forehead against the back of her head.

Page 290

She didn't push him away, but she didn't move, either.
“I didn't want this,” she said after a while.
Thiscould have meant anything. Idisio said nothing, hoping she'd clarify without a prompt.
“I wanted to go traveling,” she went on. “I wanted to see the world. Now I'm stuck. Just like I was
always afraid of.”
She shifted her weight; he let go, not wanting her to feel trapped. She turned to face him.
“You're not stuck,” he said.
“I can't travel.”
“Just because you're not going with me doesn't mean you're not allowed to go anywhere,” Idisio said.
“Lord Scratha needs to arrange alliances with the other desert families.”
“Lord Alyea would be better at that than I would.”
“She's going to Arason with Deiq.”
Her eyes narrowed. “And with you.”
“Well, yes.” He squinted at her, baffled by why that should matter.
She considered, then shook her head as though to let that issue go and said, “You really think Lord
Scratha will let me travel locally?”
“I think he'll make you his ambassador,” Idisio said, “and train you up to the job. He doesn't have many
people with your kind of brains right now.”
He felt rather proud of himself for sneaking in the compliment. He hadn't even stuttered.
“True,” she said, and smiled.
It abruptly occurred to him that he stood far too close to that smile, with no obscuring door between
them. He swallowed words that would have sounded inane and backed away a step, his stomach
tightening.
She reached out and grabbed his upper arms. He froze, caught between impulses, not sure whether to
run or move forward. She solved the impasse by putting herself right up against him.
“I want you to come back,” she said.
“I will—”
“I'm going to make sure you do.”
“Isn't that a little dramat—”

Page 291

One of her hands shifted distinctly downward.
“Uh.”
She smiled and pressed herself even closer, sliding her other hand down his back. “What were you going
to say?”
With the last of his coherency, he managed to gasp, “Never mind.”
“Thought so.”

The great hall of Scratha Fortress echoed with the chatter and movement of the guests and servants. A
caravan had arrived, to Idisio's surprise, with a large load of supplies; but as Cafad hadn't been at all
startled, Idisio decided that the caravan had been part of the “arrangements” the desert lord made during
their travels.
Even so, the feast had been drawn mainly from the supplies of the visitors rather than those of Scratha
Fortress, and the dining-hall servants wore the colors and symbols of ten different families, not one; but
the gathering turned out no less festive for those small details.
Idisio sat, rather uncomfortably, by Lord Scratha's left hand. He hadn't expected to be placed at the seat
of highest honor. Gria smiled at him across the table, seeming perfectly content with her secondary status
at the desert lord's right hand, and went on talking to Riss, who had been seated beside her.
Riss, for her part, was happier than Idisio could ever recall seeing her before. Her pale hair had been
expertly braided into a ring on top of her head; Idisio had always thought that style silly, but somehow it
looked just right on her. Someone had given her a dress of light blue fabric that almost slithered across
the curves of her body when she moved.
Several servants had turned to stare already, and Idisio watched, out of the corner of one eye, the
occasional quiet argument over who brought Riss her dishes and refilled her water cup.
Idisio couldn't help remembering the sweaty, irritable stable hand she'd been not so long ago, and shook
his head at the contrast between then and now. He found himself wishing she'd remained that hard-edged
person. It would have been easier to leave her behind.
Lady Azaniari—she refused to allow anyone to call herLord —patted his hand. “You seem unhappy
about something,” she said.
He searched hastily for a reason that wouldn't be too humiliating to admit. “You should be sitting here.
Not me.”
“I had to twist her arm,” Cafad said, “to get her that close. And she only agreed because I said she could
sit next to you.”
“That's not polite, Cafad,” Azni chided him, leaning forward slightly to look around Idisio at the desert
lord. “Idisio wasn't speaking to you.”

Page 292

“Would you have said anything different?”
“No,” she said, and laughed. “Not really.”
He grinned and turned his attention to the girls at his right. Idisio watched as the tall man deftly slid into
their conversation, pulled their attention away from chattering only to each other, and maneuvered them
into talking to people further down the table.
“Amazing,” he said under his breath.
“It's in his blood,” Azni said quietly, her expression more pensive now. “You should have met the
previous Lord Scratha; the man could make a stick agree to jump into fire—and the fire not to burn it.”
“Lord Scratha—this one, I mean—didn't show any of that when I first met him,” Idisio said.
“Call him Cafad,” Azni advised. “You've certainly earned the right, even in most public situations. And I
certainly won't be offended by it.” She paused, seeming lost in thought for a moment, then went on, “But
you're right: he's been a very bitter, angry man for a long time.” She dropped her voice, leaning in closer
to Idisio. “It's difficult to be charming when you've been hurt as badly as he has. I think Nissa was the
first person who ever really touched his heart.”
“I'm surprised she's not here,” he murmured with a glance down to the end of the table, where Lord
Rowe of Sessin Family sat across from Lord Evkit. Not places of honor, exactly, but at least they both
sat at the main table. Neither seemed displeased, although Idisio noted that Lord Evkit tended to avoid
looking in Cafad's direction.
“A Conclave isn't the place to sort that out,” she told him. “It's enough that he's allowed a Sessin onto the
grounds. More would be pushing tolerance right now. And Gria has to come first, in any case.”
Idisio watched the girls across from him for a few moments, covering his silence with several bites of
roast vegetables. Cafad had managed to start Riss talking to others and pulled Gria's attention to himself;
he mostly listened, his dark eyes intent on her thin face as she rattled on. Now and again, when she
gestured, Idisio could see the thick bandages on her wrists, mostly hidden beneath the long, dark sleeves
of her dress.
“She'll always have the scars,” Lady Azaniari said very quietly. “I'm surprised she's even on her feet. She
must be in tremendous pain; the cuffs only came off hours ago.”
Gria's eyes did have a vaguely fevered sparkle to them, now that Idisio looked for it, and her face shaded
towards ash-pale at times. A quick glance around showed no sign of Sela.
“She's Scratha, all right,” Azni sighed. “She's got that stubborn blood. Well, at least he's keeping an eye
on her. He won't let her faint at the table.”
Servants began clearing away dinner plates. One reached for Riss's plate; she thanked him with a bright
smile. The servant beamed, then almost dropped the dish as he hastily retreated. She hardly seemed to
notice, turning her attention back to her interrupted conversation.
“Riss will make a good ambassador,” Azni said, following his gaze. “I'll have my hands full training her,
but she'll do well in the end.”

Page 293

“You're staying?”
She nodded, her gaze still on Riss. “Cafad asked me to train Riss. And I'll be setting up a proper staff to
take care of the place again.” She sighed and looked around the room. “I've missed the desert more than
I thought I would.”
“Why did you leave?” Idisio asked, unable to resist. “I mean, you're a desert lord. If you don't mind
saying.”
Servers threaded around the tables, distributing small plates of fruit. Azni smiled at her server and
thanked him in a low voice; he grinned, winked, and slid an extra piece of fruit onto her plate.
Azni waited until the servers had moved further down the table before answering Idisio's question.
“I was very young when I decided to become a desert lord,” she said finally. “I chose that path for a bad
reason: a broken heart.”
Her gaze misted. Idisio began to wish he hadn't asked; he suspected this tale would turn out maudlin or
soppy.
“I was very young,” she repeated, and sighed. “I came up second on a random draw for the trials that
year; the first supplicant. . . . didn't make it.” She looked down at the fruit on her plate, nudging it
absently with one finger. “He was the boy I'd been in love with.”
Idisio stared at his plate, ashamed of his initial, condescending expectations. Under the haze of
embarrassment, the fruit didn't look nearly as appetizing as it had a moment ago.
“I'm sorry,” he said.
“Oh, it was a lifetime ago,” Azni said. She shook her head, long metal earrings chinkling, and offered him
a wry smile. “A lifetime, and yesterday. I fell in love again, of course, with Lord Regav Darden. We were
both young, and idealistic, and decided to heal the breach between the northlands and the southlands. It
didn't work very well.”
She sighed. “We probably made everything worse, in fact, with our attempts to force order onto chaos.
Regav died. . . .” She shook her head, her gaze distant again. “I couldn't stand being around the
memories, so I moved north, hoping to gain some peace. That didn't work very well, either, but I'm not
as angry as I used to be. I see my own mistakes now.”
“It's hard to believe you were ever angry,” Idisio said.
She smiled and picked up a piece of melon. “Cafad's been a welcome distraction from my brooding over
the past few years. Mm, this is good.”
Idisio allowed himself to be steered into a discussion of the food and from there into general talk of trade.
That subject quickly involved people further down the table, and he didn't have much to contribute at that
point, so he mostly watched Riss. She had quieted down and seemed to be doing more listening than
talking now. Every so often she glanced up and met his eyes for a moment, adding a smile that caught his
breath.

Page 294

Servants cleared away the fruit plates and distributed small cups filled with a black liquid. The smell had
an unfamiliar, acrid tang; Idisio stared at his cup doubtfully, then glanced to Azni for guidance. She lifted
her cup, grinned at him merrily, and drained it in one gulp.
Idisio raised his cup; Cafad's strong fingers closed around his wrist.
“You've never had desert coffee before, have you?”
“No,” Idisio admitted.
“I'd rather not have Riss and Gria covered in spray. Take a sip first.”
Idisio glanced at the two girls, who watched him with open amusement and displayed their empty cups.
“Trust me,” Cafad said, and released his grip. “Slow sip.”
Idisio sipped cautiously. The bitter, hot liquid tasted like a mouthful of liquid ash.
Cafad reached to a nearby bowl of suka crystals and dumped a large spoonful into the small cup. The
liquid inside almost overflowed at the addition.
“Stir that for a moment,” Cafad said, “and try it again.”
Now the coffee tasted like sweet liquid ash. Idisio shook his head and set the small cup aside. “I'm
sorry,” he said, “I think I'll pass.”
Cafad shook his head, grinning. “You can't. It's traditional courtesy. Everyone has to drink the whole
cup. Go on, toss it down.”
Idisio shut his eyes and gulped the two mouthfuls in the cup. It took all his willpower to keep his mouth
shut instead of spitting the harsh liquid back out.
A cheer went up, and several people started banging their cups on the table.
“What's going on now?” Idisio muttered to Azni. She rapped the table sharply with her cup and grinned
at him.
“Tradition,” she said, so he followed suit, a bit uncomfortable with the clamor.
Servants returned and began filling cups again. He tried to pull his away; Azni trapped his hand.
“Oh, no,” she said, still grinning like a maniac. “You hit the table with your cup! That means you want
more.”
“Oh, gods, no,” he said, his eyes widening. “One was plenty!”
“Well, it's full now,” she said as the servant moved away, “so you have to drink it. It's rude to refuse a full
cup.”
By one strategy or another, his cup was refilled four more times. Each time it tasted less bitter, and
seemed to pick up a new flavor. The second cup tasted of oranges, the third like roasted nuts. The fourth

Page 295

had a distinctly minty taste, and the fifth reminded him of berries.
“This issn' so bad,” Idisio said finally, and stared as Cafad let out a roar of laughter.
“Whazzo funny?” He couldn't understand why he'd slurred such a simple sentence:slurring a simple
sentence , he thought, and let out a braying snort of laughter at the way the words tangled together in his
mind.
“It's a drinking contest. Each cup has more hard liquor and less coffee,” Azni said in his ear. “I expect
you'll be hitting the floor soon.”
“Huh?” He began to form the protest:why would I hit the floor, it hasn't done anything to me ; realized he
couldn't even slur such a complicated sentence right now; and slid out of his chair with another loud,
snorting laugh at his own incompetence. A moment after that, the world went sharply away.
Just before everything blacked out completely, he thought he heard a tiny voice sigh,Humans .

“That was mean,” Idisio moaned the next day, when the headache had faded enough to allow him to
open his eyes and glare accusingly.
Riss draped a cool cloth over his face, ruining the effect. She didn't say anything, but she'd been smiling
before the cloth blocked his vision.
“Why didn't you say anything?” he demanded, pushing the damp towel away.
She pulled it back into place. “I thought you knew the game. Gods, I grew up with it. We used strong
tea, not coffee, but the notion's the same. I figured you understood what they were doing.”
“I didn't,” he said.
“Well, now you do,” she said prosaically. “You've got a surprising tolerance, you know. By the time you
went down there were only three other people left: Lord Alyea, Lord Evkit, and Lord Irrio.”
“Who won?”
“Lord Alyea, actually. At seven cups, Lord Evkit was the last challenger. He went down and she was still
smiling. I think Deiq was keeping her in a straight line on their way out, though.”
“Surprised Deiq didn't win,” Idisio muttered.
“Deiq wasn't drinking,” she told him. “Neither was Lord Scratha, past the first two cups.”
“Of course he was,” Idisio said, and pushed the cloth away. He squinted at her. “I saw him!”
“He faked it, to keep you going,” Riss said patiently. “You weren't seeing too clearly past the third cup,
anyway.”

Page 296

He shut his eyes and groaned as the headache returned.
“You need to rest. Conclave starts at nightfall, and you're expected to attend. It's just past dawn now.
Cafad said to make you spend most of today in bed.” Riss took the cloth; the sound of her dunking it in a
nearby bucket of water crackled in his hyper-sensitive ears. She wrung it out and draped the cool towel
over his face again.
“If it's any consolation, I think you earned some respect, lasting through five cups.”
“It's not.”
“I didn't really think it would be.”

Chapter Twenty-Eight
“Adrinking contest?”
Alyea shrugged and took another sip of hot coffee. Unlike the harsh, black brew from the night before,
this had been sweetened and milk of some sort added, making this cup much more palatable than the
afterdinner version. She tried not to think about where the milk had come from, given the distinct lack of
cows anywhere nearby and the goats penned outside the fortress.
Alyea knew southerners considered goat milk an everyday staple, but her mother had pronounced it
“filthy” and refused to allow it into her household. Alyea had never questioned that belief before, and the
notion of drinking it roiled her stomach.
Then again, my stomach upset might come from last night, she admitted to herself, and took another sip
of coffee.
“A drinking contest!”
She gave up trying to ignore him. “It worked.”
Deiq shook his head and took another turn around the room, which began to seem far too small to
contain his nervous energy. “It's my own fault. I shouldn't have told you to be creative. And gods,
Scratha's a lunatic, getting Idisio drunk! At least that sort of madness I expect from humans. Butyou —I
didn't think you'd try to outdrink Lord Evkit!”
“Stop fussing so much,” she said, and shut her eyes. The mug felt warm against her palms; she turned it
gently, the rough clay scratching lightly across her skin. “Like I said, it worked. I don't even have a
hangover.”
Which wasn't strictly true; a nasty, tingly pain shot temple-to-temple every so often, and she really wished
he'd lower his voice. But compared to what she'd seen of other people's day-afters, the headache hardly
qualified as a hangover.

Page 297

She idly wondered if Idisio had woken in better—or worse—shape.
“Did you expect to win?” Deiq demanded.
She opened her eyes and found him standing in front of her, scowling.
“No,” she admitted. “I thought I'd manage a decent showing, enough to gain points for trying.”
He stared at her. “You don't have any idea, do you?Nobodyhas put Lord Evkit under the table in more
years than you've been alive.”
“Well, now the record's broken.” She couldn't understand what had him so upset.
“Is it?” he said. “How much help did you have?”
She blinked at him, startled. “What?”
“The ha'rethe of this place,” he said. “How much did it help you?”
“Itdidn't,” she said, offended. “Do you think I'd cheat?”
“I thinkit would, if it saw a good advantage. What I don't understand is why.” He went back to pacing.
“As far as I know,” she said, frowning at him, “I didn't have any help. I certainly didn't ask for it!”
“Lord Evkit is teyanin. He could have tossed down twice that much desert lightning without folding,” he
said, turning to face her again. “You've never had it before. You're not a big drinker, from what I've seen.
How is it possible that you won that contest?”
“Desert lightning? Same thing as what Bright Bay calls 'white lightning'?”
He made an impatient gesture.
“I'm a desert lord,” she said, taking that as agreement. “You said yourself I'm changing.”
“So is Evkit. He should have been good for another several rounds.”
She shrugged, exasperated. “I don't know, Deiq. Quit hammering at me already, would you? Go ask the
man yourself. Maybehe faked the fold. Gods only know why he would,” she added, cutting off his next
words. “Go bother him about it, if it worries you so much. I'll stay right here and drink my coffee and
finish waking up inpeace.”
They glared at each other.
“You're going to make this a very long year,” Alyea said levelly over the rim of her cup, “if you don't
loosen up a bit.”
Deiq's scowl deepened for a moment, then slowly eased just a little. “Consider it penance for all your
sins.”
Alyea sighed, seeing only one possible answer to that.

Page 298

“I will,” she said, and went back to ignoring him.

Chapter Twenty-Nine
“You sent for me—” Idisio discovered he couldn't say 'Cafad' as though they'd become equals. Not just
yet. He stuttered a moment, then finished, “—my lord?”
“Call me Cafad,” Scratha said, waving Idisio into the library. “I'm not your lord any longer. You're
earned the right.”
Idisio let out a long breath, not sure whether to feel relieved, proud, or nervous. He settled on vague
apprehension. From street thief to noble: he'd long dreamed of such a transition but still couldn't
consistently grasp the reality of his new life. He often found himself strutting as confidently as as a
chachad bird, then falling sharply into a fit of nervous tremors, terrified that this would all turn out to be a
lie, or a joke, or a terrible misunderstanding.
“I thought you'd like to see this,” Cafad said, holding out a rolled piece of parchment. “Bird just came in.”
Idisio sat on the edge of a chair and unrolled the message, flattening it carefully on the wide table. He
absently pulled a large book from a nearby stack to pin down the top edge of the parchment, and
frowned, lips moving, as he struggled to decipher the crabbed writing. The writer seemed to have
intended to cram twenty letters to the inch, and very nearly succeeded.
He read aloud: “To Lord Scratha of Scratha Fortress, greetings and—”
“You can skip the first four lines,” Cafad interrupted. “It's all formal nonsense. Scribes always add in a lot
of silly wording if any rank is involved.”
“Oh.” Idisio counted down carefully and squinted at the fifth line. “. . . in regards to the inquiries you sent
me on, to investigate and determine. . . .” Idisio paused as Cafad gave a dry snort.
“The scribe again,” Cafad said. “I imagine he actually said something like:Thanks for the tip, I found what
I was looking for. ”
“Who?” Idisio said, bewildered, and glanced at the end of the letter. His heart skipped a beat as he made
out the scrawled, sloppy signature at the same time Cafad answered.
“Red, of course. He's found his son.”
“That's great!” Idisio said, grinning broadly.
“Yes. Why don't you read the rest of the letter? It ought to give you some good practice.” He returned
his attention to the book he'd been reading.

Page 299

Idisio hesitated. “My lord?”
“Mm?” Cafad didn't look up.
“Why are you in the library reading? I mean . . . there's Conclave tonight, and a lot of desert lords waiting
around, and . . . I just thought you'd be. . . .” He shrugged.
“Socializing?” Cafad put a long finger on the page, marking his place, and looked up. “Lady Azni is
handling the hosting duties for me at the moment. I have research I need to do before Conclave starts.”
Idisio eyed the stack of books at Cafad's left hand. “That's a lot of reading.”
“Good thing I'm a fast reader, then,” the desert lord said, and resumed reading.
Idisio watched the man scanning lines for a moment, then let out a very quiet sigh and returned his own
attention to the letter.
After a while he said, “Um . . . my lord?”
“Yes?”
“Do I understand this right? Red's son was taken in by. . . .” He squinted at the writing, which now
looked as if the scribe, in a sudden spasm of excitement, had tried to cram thirty letters into an inch.
“The Aerthraim,” Cafad said without looking up. “Yes.”
“Lady Azaniari's Family?”
“Yes.”
Idisio read on, frowning now. “They'veadopted him?”
“Yes.”
He worked his way through a few more sentences, sorting out the sailor's “voice” underneath the scribe's
posturing.
“And Red's all right with that,” he said under his breath.
“It's a far better life than he could ever give the boy,” Scratha said.
“But. . . .” Idisio reread two lines to make sure he understood them. “He doesn't even know his father
went hunting for him! Shouldn't he at least know that, and have the choice?”
“No.”
“But—”
Cafad looked up, not bothering to mark his place this time. He met Idisio's gaze directly and said,
“Idisio, understand this: Red is a randy northern sailor with a lady in every port, and if those women are
as dense as his Yhaine, more children as well. He has no home, no family, no life outside the ship's ways.
He's old enough to be set in his habits and smart enough to know that. Having the Aerthraim find his son

Page 300

first and adopt the boy as one of their own was a pure blessing from all the gods you care to name. Red
probably went out after sending that letter and got himself smashingly drunk out of relief.”
Idisio said nothing. He stared down at the letter, not really seeing it. “He should at least know his father
tried ,” he muttered.
Cafad sighed. “What difference would it really make? Would it erase the years he spent in dark places?
Would it make them hurt less—or more? Think about it. His father probably passed through the port
where his son was born many times over the last years, and never . . . once . . . thought . . . about . . .
Yhaine. Never once tried to see her. Forgot all about her, in fact, until his chance encounter with an old
friend. You tell me what would hurt the boy more; not knowing that his father tried—or knowing that his
father never tried?”
Idisio wiped at his damp eyes. “All right. I see what you're saying. All right.”
“Red's not a bad man,” Cafad went on. “He was genuinely upset about his son when I spoke to him. But
he's no father.”
They sat in silence for a few moments.
“Idisio,” Cafad said, “when you get to Arason—”
“I know. My father.” He swallowed and looked away. “I've thought about it already.”
“I'm not surprised.”
“You were talking about me just now, too, weren't you?” Idisio said, still staring at a bookshelf to his left.
“Arason was a very troubled place back then, and still is, I think.”
Idisio scrunched his eyes tightly shut. He didn't want to see Cafad's expression, even out of the corner of
his eye. “Can you imagine Deiq ever letting Lady Alyea run away with their child?”
Cafad's chair creaked as he leaned back.
“Idisio,” he said, “learn from Deiq. Don't idolize him. And don't judge your . . . father until you hear his
story. The world isn't a simple place, and people are complicated. If anything, ha'reye are even more so.”
He paused, then added, “And for all the gods' sakes,don't repeat that thought about Deiq and Alyea to
anyone , do you hear me? Youhave to learn to guard your thoughts. You're among people now who will
hear those as clearly as spoken words if you're careless.”
“Yes, my lord,” Idisio said reflexively.
“Stop that. I'm not your lord any more. Feelings like love are a vulnerability that first-generation ha'ra'hain
donot have,” Cafad said. “Ever. For anyone. Understood?”
Idisio looked into the desert lord's fierce, worried stare and nodded without speaking.
“Good,” Cafad said, seeming to relax. He looked down at his book and turned the page. “Now leave
me, please. I have a lot of reading to do.”
Idisio rose, then hesitated.

Page 301

“Lord Scratha, thank you,” he said in a rush. “I owe you—” “Nothing,” the desert lord cut in, not looking
up. “Absolutely nothing. You're a ha'ra'ha. Gratitude to a human is beneath you.”
Idisio stood still, shocked.
“Gods, I hope not,” he said without thinking.
Cafad sat back, looking at Idisio steadily, and pursed his lips. At last he said, “Welcome to your new
world, Idisio. Now please go, and let me get used to mine.”
The desert lord flicked a hand in clear dismissal, and Idisio left the room. As he walked through the
empty hallways, he listened to the sound of his own footsteps; and in the echoes, he thought he heard a
sound, soft but distinct:shass-shass-shass.
The warning shout of servants clearing a path for their noble masters. “Clear the road,” Idisio muttered,
and sighed. “But what do you do once it's clear?”
After thinking about it for some time, he decided to go ask Riss.

Secrets of the Sands
Glossary and
Pronunciation Guide
A number of the words in the southern language include the glottal-stop, which is rendered here as ^. A
glottal stop involves closing, to some degree, the back of the throat, resulting in a near-coughing sound
when released. Sometimes this sounds as though a hard “H” has been inserted.
Aqeyva(ackee-vah, alt. ahhkeh-vah): A combination of martial-arts training and meditation disciplines.
The combat training is often referred to as a 'dance' as it involves smooth, flowing motions that have no
apparent resemblance to any fighting mode.
Asp-jacau (asp-jackhow): A slender canine with long, thin snout and legs. Its short-haired coat tends
toward fawn or brindle coloring. Its excellent sense of smell is primarily used to detect dangerous snakes
and (in some cases) drugs. In Bright Bay, only royalty or King's Guard patrols may own an asp-jacau,
but below the Horn the asp-jacau is a common companion animal.
Callen(callen): One sworn to the service of a southern god.Comisti (cohmmist-ee): Criminal working out
his/her punishment through service to the god Comos.
Comos(Cohm-ohs): One of three gods honored in the southlands. Represents the
netrality/balance/questioning energies; also linked to the season of winter, the colors white and brown,
and curiosity. Callen of Comos, if male, must be castrated; women must be past menopause to be
allowed out in the world at large.

Page 302

Datda (Dat-dah): One of three gods honored in the southlands, Datda represents the
negative/death/change energies; also linked to the season of high summer, the colors red and black, and
the emotion of anger. Commonly called “the Sun Lord”; saying the name aloud is held to be bad luck.
Only Datda’s Callen may safely pronounce the holy name, but they tend to be reluctant to advertise their
affiliation; everyone knows that most Callen of Datda have trained extensively as assassins and spies.
Dathedain (dath-hehdane): Followers of the god Datda.
Dista(diss-tah): Southern term formistress ; implying a dishonorable arrangement or a woman without
honor.
Esthit(ess-thitt): A drug.
Ferahd(fhehrahhd): Illegitimate child, implications of dishonor on the part of the mother.
Ha'ra'ha(hah^rah-^hah); pluralha'ra'hain(hah-^rah-^hayn): Person of mixed blood (human and ha'rethe).
Ha'ra'hain(hah-^rah-^hayn): Plural ofha'ra'ha.
Ha'rai'nain(hah-^ray-^nayn): Plural ofha'rai'nin.
Ha'rai'nin (hah^ray-^nin); pluralha'rai'nain (hah-^ray-^nayn): One who has dedicated his or her life to
serving the ha'reye.
Ha'rethe(hah^rethay); pluralha'reye (hah-^ray): Lit. translation:golden eyes . An ancient race, predating
humanity.
Ha'reye(hah-^ray): Plural ofha'rethe .
Hayrar(hayrahr): Southern term forjudge .
Hee-ay, hee-ay(heeayyy): Lit. translation:Hey! Water! Hey! Water! Common water-seller's cry.
Iiii, iii-sass, iii-sass(eeee, eeee-sahhhh,eeee -sahhhh): Rough translation:My woman would castrate me!
A typical exaggerated protest by a merchant about lowering the price of his wares.
Ish (isshh): Prefix indicating feminine/female aspects.
Ish-tchiki, ha'rethe esse chaka(isshchick-ee, hah^rethhay essschack - ka): Lit. translation:I gave of myself
to a ha'rethe and it granted me a boon.
Ishai-s'a(ishhai-ss^ah): Lit. translation:sister under Ishrai ; implies shared service to or understanding of
the god Ishrai.
Ishell(ishhell): A room in which women worship.
Ishrai(Ish-wry): One of the three gods honored in the southlands; represents the positive/feminine/birth
energies. She is also connected to the season of spring, the color green, and the emotion of love.
Ishraidain (ishh-wrydane): Women serving penance for various crimes, under the protection of Ishrai.
Ishrait(ishhrate): High priestess of Ishrai.
Justice-right: The right of a person of higher rank to intervene in a situation and see it resolved according
to his own opinion of justice.

Page 303

Ka(kah): Honored (generic term).
Ka-s'a(kah-ss^ah): Honored lady (generic term).
Ka-s'eias(kah-ss^eyas): Honored (mixed gender) group (generic term).
Kaen (kayen): Honored leader/supreme authority.
Ke(keh): Prefix or suffix indicating masculine/male aspects.
Ketarch (kee-tarsch): Organized groups of healers in the south who focus on preserving old healing lore
and researching new ways of healing.
Mac'egas(mack^ayy-gahs): Slaves.
Machago(mahchahh-go): Slavemaster.
Micru(mick-rue): Rough translation:small death; a small, black and tan striped viper found in rocky
desert areas, whose poison is instantly fatal to large animals. Also the call-name of a member of the
Hidden Cadre.
Nu-s'e (nooss^eh): Honored man of the south; generic honorific in the absence of specific indicators.
Perroc-s'etta(pay-roke-ss^et-tah): Fermented cactus “milk”.
Perocce (payroach-ay): A kind of cactus, one that is used as a source of water by desert travelers.
Qisani(key-sahn-nee): A rocky cavern in the southern desert, which was given, under a Conclave
decision, to the Callen of Ishrai many years ago as a haven of their own. All the desert Families
contribute to supporting the Qisani. The followers of Datda and Comos also have central havens, but
they are more secretive about the locations. Blood trials conducted at any of the havens are considered
the hardest of all possible.
S'a / S'e / S'ieas / S'ii: Respectful address designators, analogous tosir andmadam ; specific to gender,
and frequently parts of complex and highly specific expressions of relationship between the speaker and
the person being addressed.
S'a(ss-^ah): feminine
S'e(ss-^eh): masculine
S'ieas(ss-^eh-ahs) : a group of mixed gender
S'ii(ss-^ee):neuter; generally used to address a eunuch.
S'a-ke (ss^ah-kay): Familiarmother's-brother .
S'ai-keia(ss-^ayy-key-ah): Roughly,sister's-child; used only to address children less than a year old.
Used against adults as an insult to suggest the person addressed is behaving like a child.
S'e deaneat (ss^ehdayah-nit): Lit. translation:male of a desert family . Usually inferred as 'son of'.
S'e-ketan / S'a-ketan(ss^eh-keh-tan / ss^ah-keh-tan): A complex relationship designation. The rough
translation isuncle: father's side/mother's side, but depending on inflection and surrounding modifiers, it
can indicate status, legitimacy, and even bloodline.Aunt would bes'e-katan(father's side) ors'a-katan
(mother's side). To add a little more confusion, the casual use or slang cuts the last few letters off,
resulting ins'a-ke ,s'aka , and so on.

Page 304

S'e-natan-kai (ss^eh-nah-ten-kai): Mother's-side cousin, twice removed.
S'e-netan / S'a-netan(ss^ehh-neh-tan, ss^ahh-neh-tan): Another complex relationship designation. The
rough translation is grandfather/ grandmother, but depending on inflection and surrounding modifiers, it
can indicate status, legitimacy, and even bloodline.
S'iope(s^igh-o-pay): Lit. translation:beloved of the gods ; implications of being neuter, all energy
devoted to the gods. Term used to refer to the priests of the Northern Church. Disrespectful nickname:
soapy.
Sa'adenit(sah^ad-den-nit): Rough translation:blood of the sand . Some sages claim it should readblood
on the sand . It comes from a very old song about blood-feud and vengeance.
Saishe-pais (sayshh-paws; alt. sayshe-pays): An expression of heartfelt gratitude, indicating that the one
so addressed has shown great honor in his/her actions.
Sessii ta-karne, I shha(sessy tahcarney, ee shhha): Rough translation:You noxious, useless (castrated)
little prick !
Se'thiss, t'a-karnain (sehh-^this,tah-^ahkar-nayn): Rough translation:beloved child of the northern
relatives .
Shall(shawl): A temporary, portable desert shelter.
Shass-shass(shaass-shaass): Lit. translation:move, move! Used by superiors to inferiors.
Sheth-hinn(shethhhnn): Assassin.
Su-s'a(sue-ss^ah): Northern lady.
Ta (tah): Prefix implying masculine aspects; usually involved in insults (see ta'karne).
Ta-karne(tahcarnay): Insult. Rough translation:asshole .
Taishell te s'a-lalien(tie-shelltehss^ah-lahh-lee-en): Lit. translation:This woman has emptied herself/has no
more to give you now.
Taishell te s'a-naila (tie-shellteh ss^ah-nail-ah): Lit. translation:This woman offers her blood to you/opens
herself to you now.
Tas-shadata(tahzshah-dahta): Rough translation:fool, coward, idiot.
Taska (task-ah; alt.tah-skah): Courier and guide.
Te(teh): Prefix indicating formality and honor; no gender.
Teth hanaa silayha (tehth hahnahsilligh-ah): Lit. translation:You (female)grace us(male or mixed
company).
Teth-kavit(tehthkah-vitt): Lit. translation:Gods hold you, and blessings to your strength.
Teyanin(tayah-nin); plural:teyanain (tay-ahnayn): A very old, small tribe which retreated to the mountains
of the Horn after the Split. Originally the judges and law determiners of the desert, they're now
considered the guardians of the Horn.

Page 305

Thass (tass; alt.thass): A person with great status, beyond even noble rank.
Thio(thee-oh): Status.
Toi, te hoethra (toy,teh hoe -thrah): Lit. translation:I swear to you I am speaking truth.
Ugren(oo-ghren): a very rare universal bonding mixture; also used in the southlands to imply unbreakable
permanence in an arrangement or situation.

Appendix A :
Desert Families
Aerthraim.............................................................................................366
Darden..................................................................................................368
Eshan ....................................................................................................369
F'Heing .................................................................................................370
Scratha ..................................................................................................371
Sessin ....................................................................................................372
Tereph...................................................................................................374
Tehay ....................................................................................................375
Teyanin.................................................................................................376
Toscin....................................................................................................377

Aerthraim Family
Desert Family specializing in technology, engineering, and science; they keep themselves isolated from
the other Families and do not hold to the Agreement.
Family symbol:

Feathers, signifying freedom and the ability to soar
above others.
Succession:

hereditary, matrilineal
Page 306

Leadership:The leader of the Aerthraim is given the title ofmahadrae ; which translates, roughly, as
“chosen mother of the free people.”
Political: Alliances with each Family, based mainly on mercantile interests; reluctant to “side with” anyone
in a dispute.
Current Family leader:Mahadrae Kallaisin
Aerthraim of note inSecrets of the Sands :
Lord Azaniari Aerthraim-Darden(Adzh-ah-knee-airyAyer- thraymDar -den; prefers to be called Azni [
Adzh-knee]): For her own reasons, she long ago left the southlands in favor of in a modest home some
distance north and east of Bright Bay.
Genealogy Notes:
Lord Azaniari Aerthraim-Darden is descended in unbroken matrilineal line from the past five generations
of Aerthraim mahadrae. When Azaniari disqualified herself from leadership of the Aerthraim by choosing
to become a desert lord, the leaderline was forced over to Pauca’s branch and resulted in Kallaisin
taking over as mahadrae. There remains to this day a great deal of ill-feeling towards Azaniari over this
situation, especially among the Aerthraim loremasters.

Darden
Located on the western coast, this Family has a reputation for treachery and deception. Their major
exports are trained asp-jacaus, excellent (and strong) distilled liquors, drugs, and herbal teas.
Family symbol:snake, signifying wisdom and alchemy
Succession:Hereditary, patrilineal
Leadership:strongly patriarchal; women are seen as weak and unfit to rule.
Political: Ongoing feud with F'Heing, and Darden's trade agreements with Aerthraim Family are on shaky
ground due to recent events.
Current Family leader: Lord Emmon Darden
Dardens of note inSecrets of the Sands
Lord Irrio Darden:Eldest of three brothers, Lord Irrio is the son of Tecky and Ferra Darden; Tecky is
the youngest of Lord Emmon Darden's three sons. Lord Emmon's eldest son, Geff, married into the
Aerthraim line and renounced his Family status, while the middle son, Amlin, has not produced any
legitimate children as of yet; Amlin still remains Heir Designate, and at this time Lord Irrio is next in line.
Azaniari Aerthraim-Darden: seeAerthraim

Page 307

Eshan
A subfamily of F'Heing, known for their colorful and color-fast dyes, excellent fine cloth, and coffee (a
slightly lesser grade than the famous F'Heing Ridge, but still excellent).
Family symbol:desert porcupine, signifying strength in submission
Succession:Assigned by F'Heing
Leadership:Decided by F'Heing
Political: Allies with and supports F'Heing in all matters.
Current Family leader:Lord Wiltin Eshan

F'Heing
West coast desert Family which produces drugs and dyes, loves powergrabs, and has a long and
bloody history of treachery. Their “enclave” area used to be home to another, smaller desert Family;
F'Heing annexed it for the fertile land and even more importantly, the sea access. F'Heing used their new
port to send ships north, building the “independent” (read: F'Heing controlled) city of Kismo before the
Northern Church had time to explore that far.
Family symbol:

mountain lion, signifying decisiveness and
dominance
Succession:Hereditary; patrilineal
Leadership:Strongly male-dominated, women are seen as weak and unfit to rule.
Political:Ongoing feud with Darden Family; almost as xenophobic as the teyanain.
Current Family leader:Lord Rimmel F'Heing

Page 308

Scratha
This line traditionally served as the premier diplomats of the desert, able to achieve a truce where others
failed. But nearly the entire Family was mysteriously wiped out some years ago, leaving only Cafad
Scratha to rebuild from the disaster; and Scratha has not inherited his family skill at charming combatants
into peaceful negotiations.
Family symbol:Groundhogs

, signifying community and shared

resources.
Ginger plants, a secondary Family motif, signify matters of
the heart and spirit.
Succession:hereditary,

matriarchal

Leadership:technically matriarchal, but in practice a team effort between the female Head of Family and
a male desert lord bound to the Fortress; they are generally either related or married.
Political:Traditionally neutral; keeps alliances evenly balanced. The slaughter of the residents of Scratha
Fortress, and Cafad's own actions, have thrown that entire equation into chaos.
Current Family leader:Lord Cafad Scratha
Scrathas of note inSecrets of the Sands :
Lord Cafad Scratha:Last survivor of Scratha Family; a brooding man with a quick temper and the
obsession that Sessin Family was involved in the death of his entire Family.

Sessin
A desert family whose specialty is glasscraft of all sorts. They are the only ones who know the secret of
casting clear, unflawed glass in large sheets.
Family symbol: Lizard, signifying sharp perception and a subtle, quick wit.
Succession:Hereditary; usually patrilineal
Leadership:patriarchal but not averse to allowing smart, strong women to take positions of
command—just not the very highest spots.
Political: Strong ties to the northern kingdom, strong influence in two major east coast port cities; tend to
think of themselves as people to ally with, not people who need to seek allies.

Page 309

Current Family leader: Lord Antouin Sessin
Sessins of note inSecrets of the Sands :
Lord Antouin Sessin:Current leader of Sessin Family; a much more open-minded man than his
predecessor, Lord Arit Sessin.
Lord Arit Sessin:The leader of Sessin Family during Cafad Scratha's youth; a hard and intolerant man
who thought only of advancing his own Family's power.
Lord Eredion Sessin: A desert lord of Sessin Family; Sessin Family's ambassador to the northern
kingdom. Great-grandson of Lord Arit Sessin; uncle (see also:s'e-ketan) of Pieas Sessin and Nissa
Sessin.
Nissa Sessin: A daughter of Sessin Family, and sister to Pieas Sessin; when King Oruen calls her “Lady”
he is making a common northerner's mistake on ranking. Nissa Sessin has no rank title beyond her last
name.
Pieas Sessin : A hotheaded, wastrel son of Sessin Family; brother of Nissa Sessin.
Genealogy notes:
Pieas and Nissa Sessin are the children of Lord Antouin Sessin by his second wife, Tashaye Sessin.
Tashaye Sessin is Lord Eredion Sessin's sister. Lord Antouin's first wife died giving birth to a son, Dorsil
Sessin, who is currently Heir to Sessin. Eredion Sessin's father, Chidor Sessin, was the only male
offspring of Sashea Sessin, Lord Arit Sessin's daughter. Lord Arit Sessin had three children: Jonnui, the
original Heir, Sashea, and Forus. Jonnui died during the Purge, turning Forus's line primary; and Forus
fathered Antouin Sessin. Thus, Eredion is Pieas and Nissa's uncle, and at some remove, cousin as well;
but he is not in line to lead Sessin unless Antouin’s children fail to produce any legitimate heirs.

Tereph
A subfamily of Sessin; they do a large amount of the work for Sessin and have almost no real
independence; essentially slaves to the larger Family.
Succession:Decided by Sessin
Leadership:Largely patriarchal, but wholly dictated by Sessin
Political: Follow Sessin's lead on all matters.
Current Family leader:Lord Hail Tereph

Page 310

Tehay
Family no longer exists; the head of Tehay got himself so far into debt with his gambling addictions that
he had to give his lands and everything on them to F'Heing Family; residents had the choice of converting
to F'Heing Family or going with their lord out into the deep sands to die in shame. The acquisition turned
F'Heing into a formidable name and erased Tehay Family from existence, as well as sparking a number of
stillunresolved questions on whether F'Heing had 'loaded the dice' to put Tehay in that situation.

Teyanin
A very old, small tribe which retreated to the mountains of the Horn after the Split. Originally the judges
and law determiners of the desert, they're now considered the guardians of the Horn.
Family symbol:Owls, especially the great horned owl, signifying ferocity and adaptability.
Succession:Normally hereditary, but exceptional circumstances and individuals have occurred in the past.
Leadership:teyanain leaders are called “Calcen”, which literally translates to “Master”; they have absolute
authority over all teyanain.
Political:Keep to themselves and ally with nobody, although some Families are under the mistaken
impression that they have formed an alliance of convenience with the teyanain. Extremely xenophobic.
Current Family leader: Lord Evkit
Teyanain of note inSecrets of the Sands :Lord Evkit (leader of the teyanain)
Genealogy Notes:There are no publicly accessible records dealing with the genealogy of the teyanain at
this time.

Toscin
A subfamily of Darden, with the most independence of any subfamily. Given complete latitude in their
actions and alliances; generally turn matters around to benefit Darden in the end. Almost completely
self-supporting; train “diplomatic and research services” (i.e., spies and secret alliance negotiators).
Succession:By merit
Leadership:Semi-hereditary; a wide range of bloodlines are considered valid for leadership, regardless of
gender, and the Toscin Council selects a new leader as they see fit. Members of the Toscin Council are
selected by a majority vote of the other members of the Toscin Council.

Page 311

Political:Bias towards keeping Darden happy, but ostensibly neutral.
Current Family leader: Lord Quill Toscin

Appendix B :
The Bead Language of the Southlands
Bead codes in the south range from incredibly complex to very simple. A few general guidelines apply:
The more rows in the bracelet/beadwork, the more important the wearer.
The material, color, shape, size, and surrounding colors, and even the string material for the beadwork,
can influence the conveyed message. Therefore, the simpler the arrangement, the simpler the message.

General Meanings of Colors
Aquamarine/blue-green: (lightest shades) Family ties, travel toward the sea, the sea (darkest shades).
Black:Absence and endings.
Blue:Depending on hue, this color can indicate: male or night (indigo); foretelling/prescience or eyewitness
(medium hues); the direction north, the direction up, or the sky (lighter hues).
Brown: One of the colors of Comos; also signifies winter or an ending.
Gold(color):Used in decorations to signify endings or money changing hands (not necessarily
wealth—could mean the bearer is a merchant or accountant, for example).
Green: Can signify, depending on hue: new beginnings or safety (lighter green); sanctuary or political shift
(darker green); wealth or travel out of dry lands to more fertile areas (emerald green); family ties or travel
towards an ocean/large body of water (blue-green).
Red:Blood, violence, or death.
White:One of the colors of Comos; can also indicate female, daytime, or 'a day' (as a measure of time).
Yellow:Depending on the hue and placement: death, the sun, extremes, the Sun-Lord, or deceit.
Sample Combinations:
Red combined with yellow – violent death or transition
Red combined with white – death of a female or (paradoxically) a birth Red combined with indigo –

Page 312

death of a male or change of ruler
Specific Pieces Explained:
Pieas Sessin's bracelet(during the audience of Alyea Peysimun, Eredion Sessin, and Pieas Sessin with
King Oruen): “a thin bracelet of gold and green beads on his left arm, arranged asymmetrically on fine
silver wire”. This signifies that Pieas, while a member of an important southern Family and thus under its
protection, is actually little more than a child in official terms, and holds no rank a king need recognize.
It's a humiliating piece of jewelry, and one Eredion almost certainly forced Pieas to wear, as the proud
young man never would have sported such an admission willingly.
Eredion Sessin's arm-band(during Eredion's audience in open court with King Oruen): “A wide, beaded
band covered the man's right forearm from the wrist nearly to the elbow.” This very likely was in the
Sessin Family colors of emerald-green and sand-tan, and composed of hundreds of small round beads.
The width indicates that Eredion is claiming contextually preeminent Sessin status; he could never wear
this arm band within Sessin Fortress, for example, because his relative status there is much lower. But as
Sessin ambassador to the northern court, this armband indicates that he outranks any other Sessin Family
member who might be present. It's a slightly audacious statement, but not one likely to be challenged.
Patterns within the beadwork itself probably also indicated, to the experienced eye, items such as
Eredion's parentage, marital status, and whether he has any children.
Alyea's bracelet(which Chac gives her at the first way-stop): “small, round pieces of some dark green
gemstone interspersed with squared off, unevenly sized pieces of thick white shell, threaded on a thin
golden wire”. This indicates a female under political protection by a major name, but not someone
important in her own right: Chac's version of “hands off, she's mine”. When Deiq sees it, he understands
exactly what Chac meant, and knowing what he does of the overall situation and how he intends to
manipulate events in the near future, finds it extremely funny.
The dining-hall attendant's bracelet(at the first way-stop dinner): “A bracelet on his right wrist ran
through a gamut of grey hues, in three rows of precisely-matched beads.” This indicates a servant of rank
or status sufficient to wait on those of noble blood. In the south, even the servants have an internal
ranking system, and this particular waystop is very sensitive to those nuances. Most likely, there were
actually only three shades of grey, one for each row; the beads were of flawed glass or clay, and they
were at least the size of a cherry pit. Alyea can perhaps be forgiven for not noticing such small details in a
moment of stress.
Note about the use of silver/gold 'wire': Metal wire, at a thread-thin width, breaks far too easily to be
used for heavy beads; what Alyea sees is either at least a rigid frame of at least an eighth-inch diameter,
or braided strands of a stiffened fiber dipped in a thin coating of silver or gold.
Miscellaneous Symbols
Not all of these are used, directly, within this novel, but may help flesh out understanding of the Families
and customs involved.
Feathersare the Aerthraim Family symbol, signifying freedom and the ability to soar above others.
Owls are the symbol of the teyanain, especially the great horned owl, signifying ferocity and adaptability.
Lizards, the symbol of Sessin Family, signify sharp perception and a subtle, quick wit.

Page 313

Groundhogs, the symbol of Scratha Family, signify community and shared resources.
Ginger plants, also often seen on Scratha tapestries, signify matters of the heart and spirit.
Badgers, often used by loremasters, signify keepers of stories and deep secrets.
Brickroot plantsrepresent tenacity and strength, but also imply a strong resistance to change.

Appendix C:
An Examination by Loremaster Council no.
1576 of Gerau Sa'adenit's
A History of Places
This book, which was only recently made available to the Council of Loremasters, is a detailed and
mostly accurate, if unauthorized, examination of the kingdom and its relation to the southlands. It must be
stressed that King Oruen commissioned this study without the knowledge or approval of this Council,
and thus this History must be examined with great care and appropriate corrections submitted to the King
with the greatest possible speed. . . .
The kingdom and the southlands are generally considered completely separate entities from a political
standpoint, and their interdependence is often overlooked. But even a brief examination shows that the
one could not, throughout our shared history, have flourished without the other.
The southlands came first. That is undisputed. Civilization began in the oncefertile lands south of the
Horn; in fact, oral history insists that once the entire southlands was as lush as Water's End, and not much
higher in elevation. The abrupt rise into a mountain-high desert was due, according to various legends, to
natural cataclysm, the anger of the gods at humanity's presumption, or an evenstranger explanation
involving an ancient race with godlike powers.
Whatever the cause, the changing land forced the tribal structure into closer and larger groups, and led
directly to permanent settlements and the first towns. Dialects unified and merged, as did bloodlines long
held separate; loremasters gather in great numbers to sort out frustrating questions over ancient genealogy
when an important inheritance is at issue. . . .
The text of this thick book is notable for two things: one, its comprehensive nature, and two, the odd
changes in the 'voice', as though it had actually been written by two separate people. The first is stiff and
formal, as one would expect a highly educated noble to write; the second is rather morecommon. . .

Page 314

Place-names in the kingdom sound simple, but a little digging reveals deep roots. The word “king”, for
instance. The original word for “honored tribal leader/supreme authority” was Kaen (Kaena for females),
and the northern kingdom, in the old books, is called Kaenoz. Those names have since shifted to our
modern “king” and “kingdom”. Attempts to give the kingdom a proper name have run into strong
resistance from the Northern Church and its followers, who believe that their founder, Wezel, should be
in some way honored in the chosen name. Their suggestions have tended towards names like Wezeldom
and Fourgodsland, and have generally been rejected out of hand; although Ninnic and Mezarak
apparently worried the court deeply at one point by seriously considering making those names official.
Fortunately, both men were easily distracted and the issue soon faded from their minds. . . .
The simplistic approach displayed in the above excerpt turns an important subject into near-mockery, a
sharp contrast to the more learned approach of the first section. Repeated inquiries as to the true identity
of the author or authors meet no answer from King Oruen or any of his court, staff, or scribes; whatever
hand transcribed this entire volume, no doubt from a collection of notes, is not admitting to the act. . . .
As language changes, the origin of names is lost to all but the loremasters who dedicate their lives to
preserving the past; but a better understanding of our beginnings is vital to a firm comprehension of our
present, and furthers planning for the future. A word as simple ass'a, “honored woman”, can be traced
back hundreds of years to the originalsaaera, a woman of status; likewise the masculine form,s'e, was
onceseere, which indicated not only an honored man but could, with a slightly different inflection, indicate
that the subject possessed predictive powers. The implication that the ancients believed that women
could not be seers is undeniable.
Place names proved as fluid: the mountain area known today as the Horn was, when initially settled by
the teyanain, called the Teychek-haiz, “Horns of Justice”. As the teyanain became more insular and less
involved with the general population, that name fell out of favor and was replaced with the more neutral
“Horn”. The king's home city was once Iliaye-Ayrq, “Bright Triumph of Ayrq”, in reference to King
Ayrq's astonishing achievement of pulling all the squabbling factions together into a relatively unified
settlement; the fast-growing town's success as a port altered the name, over time, to “Bright Bay”. . . .
The author goes on, with a fair degree of accuracy, to detail the history behind every significant name in
the southlands and the kingdom. This section is largely in the more formal voice, but now and again the
common tone raises its head again. . . .
The names given on maps and the names used by ordinary people are often very different. The large
swamp to the east of Bright Bay is a perfect example. Maps in the royal library assign the incredible
name Optsch t'a Kella Wezel; literally, “The Wealth and Divinity of Wezel”. A shorter version, on less
official maps, is Optakazel Swamp, which translates to “Madman's Swamp.” Some local commoners
even call the area “Ugly Salt Swamp”, referring to its main export, a cloudy, lumpy grey salt which tastes
exceptionally bitter and is for some reason in high demand at noble tables (under its official name of
optschalz, or “rich man's salt”, rather than the common moniker of “ugly salt” or “madman's salt”, of
course). . . .
There is a distinct and reprehensible slant to the overall History, in that the author or authors are clearly
disposed against the Northern Church. Historians must needs remain neutral to accurately convey facts,
and considering the many good works the Northern Church has to its name (one of the few names not
traced in this volume, another example of bias) it is improper to base all perceptions on the recent difficult
times.

Page 315

Appendix D:
Excerpted Notes from Loremaster Council
Records
Transcribed shortly after the slaughter at Scratha Fortress:
While Cafad Scratha does not hold a true leadership line, his unusual circumstances dictate that his claim
to Head of Family status be upheld. The alternatives are even further removed from the true bloodline
than the boy himself, or are unacceptably tainted in their associations . . . Should a true-line survivor ever
be discovered, of course, his status as Head of Family is to be stripped immediately and the proper line
reinstated. . . .
Azaniari's status, unusual though it may be, and against the duly recorded objections of her own Family
loremaster, must be upheld due to taking the trials through Darden and her current known association
with Regav Darden. She is hereby confirmed in these Records as an Aerthraim desert lord, and her
children are to be watched with great care and steered into choosing partners outside the Aerthraim
bloodline. . . .
Transcribed shortly after Ninnic's death and the ascension of Oruen to the throne of Bright Bay:
The child given through Cafad Scratha's blood trial turned out deformed and has not survived; the
bastard child produced in the adjustment period after his third trial turned out deformed and has not
survived; there are no further traceable offspring after that point. It must be considered, at this point, that
Cafad Scratha was so damaged by the emotional trauma of losing his family as to render him effectively
sterile. A close watch shall be kept to ensure that any deformed offspring are duly destroyed to avoid
introducing undesirable variables into what may remain of the Scratha line, and a new attention is being
paid to the previously dismissed alternates. . . .
The children of Azaniari Aerthraim and Regav Darden did not survive long enough to beget children of
their own, and as Regav may now be presumed dead and events have altered Azaniari such that she may
no longer bear children, that line is to be considered, regrettably, closed. However, Azaniari's twin
brother, Allonin, must be given closer scrutiny despite his multiple offenses; his viable fertility is proven
beyond question, as are his wits, strength, and ingenuity. . . .
Pieas Sessin is moving in a thoroughly undesirable direction, and his illegitimate children are difficult to
track; those we have confirmed, however, are being removed and placed in more appropriate
surroundings. Pieas himself remains heedless of his responsibilities and his reputation. . . .
Lord Oruen's fertility is proven, and his illegitimate children are being watched closely; but he has, as yet,
shown no interest in an official match. Until his sanity is established as utterly secure, this Council declines
to press the issue further. . . .

Page 316

About the Author
Leona Wisoker got her start as a writer when she was eight, with a story about all the vacuum cleaners
in the world breaking down at the same time. Ever since then she has successfully used the excuse of
writing to avoid housework, even going so far as writing poetry (which is then safely locked away in a
lead-lined box) when nothing else will save her from chores.
Leona’s work is fueled equally by coffee and conviction; she has been known to take over the entire
dining room to deconstruct a difficult novelin-progress. Addicted to eclectic research and reading since
childhood, she often chooses reading material alphabetically rather than by subject or author. This has led
her to read about aardvarks, birds, child-warriors, dragons, eggs, faeries, ghosts, horses, and many other
random subjects.
Her short stories have appeared inFutures: Fire to Fly andAnotherealm; she is a regular reviewer for
Green Man Review andFantasy Magazine . She has lived in Florida, Connecticut, Oregon, New
Hampshire, Nevada, Alaska, California, and Virginia; has experienced the alternate realities of Georgia,
North Carolina, Arizona, New York, Long Island, and Italy; and believes that “home is wherever my
coffee cup is filled.”
She currently lives in Virginia with an extraordinarily patient husband and two large dogs, and she almost
never vacuums.

Photo: Earl Harris
Read more about Leona Wisoker and her work at http://www.leonawisoker.com

Want More?
Visit the Children of the Desert page on the Mercury Retrograde Press website:
http://www.MercuryRetrogradePress.com/Worlds/ChildrenoftheDesert.asp
for even more background on the world ofSecrets of the Sands —and a sneak peek at the first chapter
of Leona Wisoker’s next novel,Bells of the Kingdom .

Page 317

Scanned & proofed by DragonAshe (a.k.a. Merithyn)
Current e-book version: 1.0
Source html&tiffs for additional proofing or editing:
http://www.mediafire.com/?sharekey=07e566c080d9fd5e24a64199ac7f73e5a267427636d977eb32ff2c601b65dabd

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------If you like the book...go BUY it!!!! Support the Author!!!

Prologue

The Dead
The Worldspine surrounded them. Mountains like immense teeth, jagged and huge and white,
reared up all around their little valley. Monsters overshadowing the dense dark greens and
blacks of the pine forest surrounding a lake of glacier water, the brightest purest blue that
Kemir had ever seen.
Very slowly, they were dying. Nadira couldn't see it yet and Kemir didn't have the heart to tell
her, but it was true. He'd kept them alive for five days now, since Snow had vanished beneath
the frozen waters of the lake, but it couldn't last. The weather had been kind to them, but wind
and rain were always fickle in the Worldspine. One day he'd run out of arrows, or his
bowstring would break. Or one of them would get hurt or fall ill. He wasn't catching enough
food, and they didn't have the clothes or the shelter to stay properly warm. A hundred things
could go wrong, and sooner or later one of them would.
They had to move. He tried to break it to Nadira, to make her understand that Snow wasn't
coming back, that their only chance was to leave and head for lower ground. A boat, he
thought. Or at least a raft. Water always found the quickest way down the mountains.
She screamed in his face. Shrieked at him that Snow was coming back. He backed away. One
more day, he promised himself. One more day and then he'd leave, with or without her. He
could force her to come, he knew that, but he'd let her choose. She could stay and die if she
wanted. That's what Sollos would have done.
As that last day began to fade he made his weary way back to the lake, carrying with him
what little food he'd been able to hunt and gather. The forests here were harsh and hostile and
yielded little. He was hungry. They were both hungry. They'd eat and they'd still be hungry.
He reached what passed for their camp at the edge of the lake
and the hairs on the back of his neck bristled. He couldn't see Nadira. The forest was silent
except for the wind and the ever-present creaking and groaning of the glacier. He stared out
across the lake. And suddenly he felt the fire and iron of the dragon's presence, a moment
before the water began to churn. Little One Kemir, I am hungry.
Kemir froze, rooted to the spot. The dragon was rising out of the lake as white as the glacier
ice, clouds of steam billowing around her.
And she was hungry. Five days lying at the bottom of a frozen lake would do that, I suppose.
She was probably going to eat him then. Somehow, he couldn't bring himself to be properly
terrified. In some ways it would be a relief.
'Right. So you're not dead,' he growled. It was just as well, he decided, that Nadira wasn't
anywhere nearby. As last words went, those definitely weren't the best.
That's when her absence hit him right in the chest. Nadira. Where was she?
No.
'Alchemist's poisons didn't kill you then. Freezing water did the trick, eh?' Why wasn't she
there?
Yes. And no, I do not intend to eat you. I am ... grateful ...to you for showing me this place.
If dragons had expressions, Kemir hadn't learned to read them yet. The dragon's name was
Snow, and as far as Kemir could tell, she always looked like she was about to eat him. Come
on, woman, where are you? You should be here. Your dragon's back.
'Hurrah for me, then.' He sat down. 'So you're hungry. So go eat something.' He couldn't keep
it in any more. 'You didn't eat Nadira, did you?' He felt almost stupid asking. Of course she
hadn't.
There was a long silence. She was not your mate.

'No! She's not my mate! She's my ...' Yes, now that was a good question. She was his what,
exactly? His friend? Don't be ridiculous. His companion? He grimaced. That made him sound
like an old widow.
Your nest-sister.
Which made him laugh. Since he couldn't think of anything better, he nodded. 'Yes. My nestsister. So, did you eat her?'
Yes.
Kemir didn't move. Snow was joking. She had to be. Even though dragons had no sense of
humour, even though Snow had never said anything funny about anything, this had to be a
joke.
I was hungry. He could feel something in her, though. The same feeling as had been inside
her when her Scales had disappeared. Shame, perhaps.
No, she wasn't joking.
The rage started in his face. At the end of his nose. A heat that washed slowly into his cheeks.
'And that's what you do when you're hungry.' Down his neck, growing hotter and stronger. He
picked up a stone from the lakeside, jumped to his feet and threw it at the dragon in the water.
It bounced off her scales.
Yes. And I am hungry still, Kemir.
Across his shoulders. 'Whoever happens to be there. Whoever is closest. You couldn't wait.
You couldn't hold it in. You couldn't go hungry. You just ...' Through his arms. He hurled
another stone at her and then threw up his hands in exasperation. 'Bang. Gone. Whatever
happens to be there. She was your ...' She was what? What could you be to a dragon?
Food is food, Kemir.
There weren't any stones big enough to answer that. Or rather there were, but Kemir couldn't
lift them. 'What?' Oh yes, that really told her.
She was not your mate, Kemir.
The heat reached his hands, oozing down his fingers like lava until it reached the very tips.
Then it all came rushing back. From everywhere. From his fingers, from his toes, from his
arms and legs and chest and exploded all together in his head. He roared with rage and loss
and sheer disbelief and hurled himself into the water, clutching his hatchet. 'Why did you do
that?' He stopped, He had to stop. He was already floundering in freezing water up to his
waist. Snow was too deep to reach. He threw the axe at her as hard as he could and watched
as it it too bounced off her scales and vanished into the water. He screamed at her again.
'Why? Why did you do that?'
His words echoed off the mountainsides. Snow didn't move. Kemir pounded the water with
his fists.
'Come here! Come here where I can reach you!'
If it is any help to you, she did not particularly mind.
'What? She didn't ... ? She didn't what?' He clutched at his head and surged back to the shore,
slipping, falling, lurching out of the water. There had to be something, somewhere. Anything.
A weapon. Something to batter a dragon. He'd rip her apart with his bare hands if he had to.
She did not particularly mind.
He picked up another stone. Snow was coming towards him, very slowly, one careful step at a
time. He threw the stone, then another and another, as fast as he could until Snow reached the
shore. Then he let out a mad shriek and ran at her, hacking at her legs and claws with his
knife. But no matter how hard he stabbed, her scales turned his blade. He beat on her with his
fists and howled. 'Why? Why did you do that?'
Because she was hungry. That was all. She didn't even have to say it. And now she was just
letting him vent his anger.
Kemir backed away.

'Eat me!' he roared, and threw down the knife. He stood in front of her head. 'Come on then!
Eat me!' No.
'Why not? She was all I had left. My last. Come on, dragon, eat me too!' He picked up another
stone and then put it down again and reached for an arrow. 'Curse you, dragon. She didn't
particularly mind being eaten?' He pulled back the bowstring. Maybe if I aim for the eye ...
No, Kemir, she did not.
He looked down the length of the arrow to aim and met Snow, eyeball to eyeball at the other
end of it. What am I doing? I was wondering that myself.
He took a deep breath. 'You tell me, dragon, how do you know that she didn't particularly
mind? Did you ask before you ate her?'
An arrow in the eye will hardly kill me, Kemir, but it would leave an unpleasant sting.
Slowly, Kemir lowered the bow. He could almost believe it. Nadira had been the one who'd
made them wait while Snow lay deep in the lake. If it hadn't been for her he'd have left days
ago, She'd made them stay because she couldn't let go ... And he'd seen
her, after they'd failed, after Snow had vanished into the lake. He'd seen her curled up when
she thought he wasn't near, sobbing softly, talking to the children she no longer had as though
they were still there, to the husband she'd seen murdered. The fight had gone out of her and
with it all the light, all the life. Was that it? Were the memories too much? Was that why she
wouldn't let go? Were you just waiting to die?
Waiting for her next cycle, Kemir.
He had tears in his eyes now. Now he thought about it, he could almost believe that Snow was
right, that Nadira really didn't mind at all. 'We don't get a next one, Snow. We're not like you.'
And how is it that you are so sure, Kemir? She stretched her wings and looked up at the sky.
She was thinking of leaving. Just like that.
'What if I don't want to come? Do I get eaten too?' The thought scared him. Not the thought of
being eaten. The thought of being alone.
Would you mind?
'Yes, I'd fucking mind!' He put the arrow back in his quiver and then shuddered, shaking the
dread and the emptiness away, back into the bottle he carried deep inside him. Anger was
better, much better. He threw another stone at Snow instead, then another and another. 'Why,
dragon? Why did you kill her? Why did you do that? She wasn't much, maybe, but she was all
I had. She was the closest thing I had to a friend. Shit!' The worst of the rage was gone,
though, and he couldn't find the will to rekindle it. What was left behind was only sadness.
Why?
'She was your friend. Holy sun! That could have been me! What?'
Why? Why would you mind, Kemir?
'What?' He shook himself and then held his head in his hands. 'Are you soft in the head,
dragon? What sort of question is that? Why would I mind? Why would I mind if you ate me?'
Yes. Why would you mind, Kemir?
'Because it would fucking hurt!'
It can be very quick.
'Well then because I'd like to he alive, thank you.
And why do you wish to be alive, Kemir? What will you do with this existence?
'I don't know!' He turned away and stamped his foot. 'Get shit-faced, fuck whores and kill
dragon-knights, that's what. Just as soon as I'm shot of you.'
I know where your alchemists live, Kemir. I know how they make us weak. I will go now and
I will consider how things should best be done. When I return, I will make a proper end of it.
You will come with me. Your knowledge will be of use.
'Uh uh. You go, dragon. I can't stop you but I'm not helping you. Not now.' Kemir pursed his
lips. He looked around the lake, at the thick walls of snow-speckled trees, at the frozen

glacier, at the whiteness of the peaks above. 'I think I'd rather stay here and slowly die of cold
while I mourn. Tagging along, waiting for the day when it's my turn to be food? No, that's not
my choice.' Really though? Could I bear that? To be left out here? Alone?
Do not pretend, Kemir. Remember that I see inside you. I see fear. I see horror and surprise
and a great deal of vengeance. Mostly I see loneliness. That is something I understand, Kemir,
for I too am alone. I do not see much regret. You will not mourn for long.
Kemir sat down, shook his head and unstrung his bow. 'That's because I still don't quite
believe you did it,' he said quietly, as much to himself as to Snow. He sighed. 'Do I have a
choice, dragon?'
There is always choice, Kemir. The Embers have shown you that.
He spat out a bitter laugh. 'Yeah. Right. I can help you burn dragon-knights or I can die.' He
sighed again. 'Well I'm not one for dying. So I'll come with you. As soon as we're out of the
mountains, you do whatever you do and you leave me alone. Finished. Done. We go our
separate ways. Find someone else.'
As you wish.
He took a deep breath. 'Snow?' Kemir?
'If you ever eat someone I call a friend again, I will find a way and I will kill you. I don't care
how much they don't mind. I don't care if they're positively trying to claw their way down
your throat. Never again. Am I clear?'
You are clear, Kemir.
She was laughing at him. He could tell.

One

The Red Riders
Out of the sun there shall come a white dragon, and with the white dragon a red rider. Thieves
and liars shall quiver and weep, for the rider's name shall be Justice, and the dragon shall be
Vengeance.
1

The Prophet
He was running through a forest, between trees beside a river, wearing nothing more than a
shirt. He was soaking wet and the water was icy. Here and there patches of snow lay on the
ground but he didn't feel the cold. He was much more afraid of the heat. In the skies above the
treetops, two dragons laced the world with fire. They were past rage, past fury. They were
dying. He'd killed them and they knew it. They knew where he was too.
He'd tried to hide deep amid the darkness, beneath layer upon layer of leaf-shadow and
branches, but they always found him. He'd tried to run, but the fire always followed him and
the forest turned to flames and ash behind him. He'd tried the freezing waters of the river and
the dragons had simply boiled it dry. Somehow they never quite caught him. He knew exactly
why. They were slowly dying and so was he. When the trees ran out, they would all burn
together. Was he afraid? He wasn't sure. Angry? Yes. Desperate? Yes. Willing to do almost
anything to stay alive? Yes. But afraid? No. He'd done what needed to be done. Jaslyn would
survive. The princess had been saved from the dragon. The knight had done his duty. Now the
trees were running out and the end was coming, but no, he wasn't afraid.

'Stop!'
He felt the voice more than he heard it. It wasn't a real voice, not even a human voice. It
boomed like a thunderclap, shaking mountains and felling trees. The air filled with ash shaken
up from the ground and the dragons fell from the sky and were still. The forest and the river
were suddenly gone. Where they'd been, only bare stone remained. Bare stone and a man,
standing waiting for him not more than twenty paces away.
Semian stopped. He looked the man up and down. Long robes the colour of blood. A craggy
face. Long white hair and a long
white beard, braided, that reached almost to his waist. Every inch a dragon-priest. Except for
his skin, as pale as ice, and his hands which were black and cracked, his fingers burned to
stumps. And his eyes, which blazed with bloody fire.
'Stop!' said the priest again. This time the world didn't shake. Semian looked behind him. The
old dragons were gone now. There was no sign of them or of the river or the trees, or even the
smoking ruins of the alchemists' stronghold. Only the mountains were the same. Rising
among them, taller than even the highest peak, a single massive crimson dragon filled half the
sky. It lifted its head and stared lazily at him with eyes the size of lakes. Semian fell to one
knee and bowed his head. The priest and the dragon were somehow the same. He didn't know
how he knew, didn't know how that could be, but he knew it as surely as he knew the feel of
his own sword in the palm of his hand.
'Rise, rider.'
Semian didn't move. 'I am dead, am I not?' The priest said nothing.
'You taught us that we would join the great dragon whose fire is the sun. That we would be
taken into that fire and our souls would be forged anew.'
'You are not dead,' said the priest.
'I followed with the other Embers with dragon-poison in my blood, and in our dying we did
what we left our caves to do. The dragons are slain.'
'No, they are not, and nor are you,' said the priest again. 'You drank the dragon-poison and
you survived. You are one of us now. One dragon too survived. One and one, balanced
against one another. A harmony of fire.'
'I ...' Joyful tears filled Semian's eyes. He felt the heat of passion explode inside him, filling
him until there was no space for anything else and then growing still greater.
'You have always been a loyal servant of the church,' said the priest. 'You have always stayed
true. Your heart is pure. Now you shall have your reward. Kneel. And remember. Remember
the stories. Remember the myths. Remember the legends. Remember what only we priests
and our faithful care to preserve. Remember the beginning and remember the end.'
The beginning and the end.
Before there was time there was the void. Into the void there came the sun and the moon and
the earth and the stars. 'And each created life.'
The shifting stone-creatures of the earth. The moon-children made of liquid silver. The ghost
forms of the star spirits. And us. The children of the sun.
'Of the Great Flame.'
The Great Flame.
'And each claimed to be the foremost of the gods.'
And war and strife and sorcery shattered the land.
'And in the cracks of creation the dragons were born.'
They tore the magic from the land. They scourged the earth with fire. They sought to return
all things to the void from which they had come.
'For only then could they too return.'

And yet through blood-magic, the children of the sun cheated the end of the world. Through
alchemy they called to them the Silver King, who chained the dragons and stilled the restless
void.
'Thus spoke the prophet with the voice of the wind.'
Semian was already kneeling. He bowed his head again. The priest ran one ruined hand
through the braids of his beard. It came out dripping red with blood. 'Your reward for your
faith.' The bloody hand waved over Semian, spattering him, and then pressed against his
forehead. Semian could feel the blood running slowly down his face. 'For then the prophet's
face became terrible to behold and he spoke with the voice of the desert. All chains break.
Fire will sweep the bones of the world. Out of flames there shall come a white dragon, and
with the dragon a red rider. Thieves and liars shall quiver and weep, for the rider's name shall
be Justice and the dragon shall be Vengeance.' The hand pressed harder against his brow.
'Arise, rider. The end-times are coming. You have been chosen. You have taken the poison
and you have lived. The white dragon flies free. The flames of destruction have come, and out
of the flames the red rider shall be born. Be Justice, Rider Semian. Be the red rider and find
the dragon whose name is Vengeance. Cleanse the world of its wickedness. Burn it away.
Justice and Vengeance, Rider Semian, Justice and Vengeance. For I am the
Silver King and I have set you free.' The priest and the mountains slipped away into dust.
Only the priest's hand remained, still there against his skin, and the voice.
Justice and Vengeance. Justice and Vengeance ...
The priest's words echoed for an eternity, yet even they decayed. Other voices, other words
rose up, drowning the priest in mindless chatter. Familiar voices. People.
Friends?
Semian listened to them as best he could, but his mind was adrift and nothing made any sense.
Nothing until three words pierced him like a lance.
The Red Riders.

2

Torchlight
'A rider without a dragon is a like a one-armed swordsman.' Jostan was drunk. He was
slumped in the darkest corner he could find of the worst drinking hole within walking distance
of Southwatch. His words were slurred. He glowered at the table in front of him. The wood
was stained and on the stains there were more stains. Where there weren't stains there were
letters or, more often, crude pictograms badly hacked into the wood by a hundred years of
drunken knights determined to leave their mark. 'No. It's worse. It's like a no-armed
swordsman. With no legs.'
Beside him a rider was weeping. He didn't even know her name. She'd found him there,
glaring in the gloom, and simply sat beside him. She obviously knew the place well since she
barely had to lift her eyes towards the tavern-keeper to summon another flagon of ale. She
was already drunk when she'd sat down beside him and she showed no signs of slowing
down.
'I've got a dragon,' she said suddenly. 'I didn't used to have a dragon, but I've got one now.'
'I used to have one.' Jostan sighed. 'Then the Embers poisoned it. Now I haven't got one any
more. Princess Jaslyn was supposed to give me another one. But she's gone away.' Gone away
having virtually dismissed Semian from her service. And, Jostan discovered, him as well,

almost as an afterthought. Whatever Semian had said, apparently, had been spoken for them
both.
Stupid little girl. That's what she was, after all. Almost a girl. To think he'd held a torch for
her not long ago. And there was another thing. What was he thinking? A rider from a nothing
family and a dragon-princess? I must have been wearing my stupid-cap.
'She used to look at me, though,' he mumbled. Little looks that made him wonder; and then
Knight-Marshal Nastria had sent him with her to the alchemists and the dragons had come and
burned
everything and he'd held her in his arms, stopping her from running into the flames, and she'd
liked it. For a moment at least, she'd liked it.
Or that's what he'd thought. Maybe he was fooling himself. Deluded. She was made of the
same heartless flint as her mother. 'No dragon. Thrown away. Semian's no better. Spent days
sitting with him trying to make him not die and now that he's come back, he's gone crazy. Had
some stupid vision while he was in his coma and now all he talks about is the Great Flame
and the Red Riders.'
The rider beside him lifted her head and turned towards him. 'Red Riders? You know where
they are?' Jostan shook his head. 'No. No idea.'
The other rider slumped and promptly lost interest in him again.
'Semian says we have to find them and join them. Says that's where he's meant to be. Not that
he's got a dragon either. Fat lot of use either of us would be. Justice and Vengeance without
any dragons.' He spat on the floor. 'I suppose we could tend the camp fires while the real
riders fly. I've done that before.'
'Hyrkallan leads the Red Riders,' slurred the other rider. 'He's the greatest there is. Was there
too. He was.' Her head lolled sideways and she looked at him. 'Who flies with the Red
Riders?'
Jostan shrugged. 'I don't know their names. The riders who fought their way out of the
Adamantine Palace on the Night of the Knives. Knights who served Hyram or Queen Shezira.
Who see through the speaker's lies. Her and Jehal. We could have ... We could ...' The thought
petered out in disarray. We could have what? Stopped Lady Nastria from trying to kill Queen
Zafir? Stopped Queen Shezira from pushing Hyram off a balcony?
The other rider slowly slid sideways, slumping against him like a sack of potatoes. Her head
lolled on his shoulder. Jostan sighed. That's all I need.
'Can I come too?' She sounded ready to pass out. Jostan pushed her away. She grumbled and
groaned but managed to stay upright.
'Leave me alone.'
'But I want to come with you.'
'I don't even know you.' Jostan started to get up, but now the other rider grabbed hold of him
and pulled him back down with all the fierce strength of the very drunk.
'Nthandra of the Vale.'
Jostan sat slowly back down. He looked the woman carefully up and down, wondering if she
was lying. Nthandra of the Vale. Everyone in Southwatch knew the name. Nthandra of the
Vale, whose father was King Valgar's knight-marshal, whose brothers and sisters were his
honour guard, whose betrothed was his adjutant. Nthandra of the Vale, whose entire family
had died at King Valgar's side on the Night of the Knives. Nthandra of the Vale, who was said
to roam Southwatch like a ghost.
'Nthandra ... ?'
She fell across the table and then turned her head to leer at him. 'You know what they say
about me?'
'Your brothers ... your father ... your husband ... They all died.'

'All dead, all dead, all dead. So what else do they say about me?' She reached out a languid
arm and stroked his cheek. Jostan swallowed hard.
'I don't... I don't know.'
'Don't they say that I gave myself to the man I was to marry before we were wed?' 'I ...'
'Don't they say that I'm carrying his child inside me?' 'Urn ...'
'Don't they say I'm a drunk who'll give herself to any man who takes her fancy as freely as the
autumn wind plucks leaves from the trees?'
A strange feeling crept over Jostan, starting from his feet and rising slowly. A numb sort of
paralysis. 'I haven't heard such things ...' He couldn't take his eyes off her. That was the drunk
inside him, throwing care and caution to the wind.
'Don't they say that I lay with three riders in one night on the day that I learned my betrothed
was dead?'
'I ...' Jostan didn't know what to say, but that didn't seem to matter. Nthandra's face screwed
up and she started to sob.
'When I'm alone, all I think of are the dead.' The hand on his
cheek moved to his shoulder and gripped his shirt. 'Don't leave me alone. I can't be alone. Use
me like a whore or hold me like a baby, I don't mind, but please, please don't let me be alone.'
Jostan's tongue seemed to have swollen so it didn't fit in his mouth any more. He had to work
hard to make words come out. He took hold of her hand. 'There's a place we can go.'
The sobs went away and her eyes gleamed. 'There are lots of places we can go.'
'No. There's a place for forgetting.' He staggered to his feet and pulled her up after him. She
could barely walk so he put one of her arms around his shoulders and half dragged her away
to the door. Eyes watched him go. Other riders. He didn't care what they thought. All the time
he'd spent serving one mistress and then another. He'd nearly died, back in the caves with
Jaslyn. Yes, could easily have died. And what does she do? She throws me away. Whatever
Semian said or did, I didn't do anything. I just held her when she needed to be held. When that
mask of stone cracked for a moment. And the thanks I get?
He looked at Nthandra of the Vale, glassy-eyed, head flopping from side to side, barely even
conscious. She didn't look much like a princess, but somehow he saw Jaslyn's face anyway.
'I'm not just going to hold you,' he muttered.
'I don't care.'
You should. So should I. But he didn't. He took her to the door of another place. A place
where drunkards lay sprawled in the street and two heavy men in thick leather coats lounged
by the door. A place where he knew, from the smell of the air, that they could both forget.
One of the men stepped away from the wall and blocked his path. 'Rider.' He nodded. Jostan
nodded back, not knowing what he was supposed to say. The other one was standing
straighter now, only pretending to be bored.
'Got gold ?' asked the first. Jostan nodded. He leaned forward and fumbled in his boot, where
he kept a few gold dragons. Nthandra slipped off his shoulder and fell gracelessly into the
dirt. The men in the leather coats both laughed.
'You sure you need to go in?' asked the second one. Jostan shot him a filthy look and gave the
first one a coin. That wasn't enough, so he felt around and fished out a second one.
'Gold,' he said. The man nodded again and went back to propping up his wall. Jostan hauled
Nthandra to her feet. She was gone now, completely gone. He took her in anyway. As soon as
he walked through the door, the smell of Souldust hit him like a brick in the face. Souldust
fresh from Evenspire where men freely offered it in the streets. Semian would never speak to
him again if he found out, but as much as anything that was why Jostan was doing this. You
can all screw yourselves. I don't have to do anything for any of you any more.
Inside, he could barely see a thing. A single dim candle lit each room. Bodies lay strewn
about, some of them sleeping, some of them sitting, eyes glittering in the candle flame, open-

mouthed and motionless. Some of them seemed to be naked, but in the darkness he couldn't
be sure. From a few rooms deeper in came the grunts and moans of some couple. Here and
there, as he stepped over legs and arms, faces glanced up at him. They were all empty. Empty,
yes, and he wanted to be exactly like them.
He eventually found a room that was a bit less crowded than the rest, where there was space
to sit down. This was where the sounds of the man and the woman were coming from,
growing louder as they slowly approached their climax. The air smelled of sweat and musk.
Only, as he realised after a few minutes, it wasn't a man and a woman but a man and another
man. They ignored him, lost in their own world, and Jostan did the same. He propped
Nthandra up beside him and held her tight, sucking in deep breaths of the dust-laden air. It
didn't take long before the drug and the gallon of ale he had inside him took him away, far
away.
Sometime in the night he became aware of something moving, and then a sensation of
exquisite pleasure. He wasn't sure when he opened his eyes, for the candles had long gone out
and the room was as black as pitch. Filled with snores too. Something soft brushed his lips.
His skin was tingling, his heart thumping. He was intensely, painfully aroused. As he shifted,
he realised that someone had their hand in his trousers.
He jumped, thinking of the two men who'd been there when they'd come in earlier.
'Shhh.'
Nthandra pressed her lips to his, while her hand continued to work. Jostan moaned.
'Did you mean what you said?' she whispered. 'About the Red Riders?'
His hand reached out and touched skin. As he explored her, he found she was almost naked,
her clothes hanging loosely, every button and fastening open. He reached between her legs,
but she batted him away.
'Did you mean what you said?'
'Yes,' he said. 'But I don't have a dragon.'
'But you can find them.'
'Yes.' He had no idea how, but it was the answer she wanted and that was enough.
'I have a dragon,' she breathed.

3

What a Dragon Costs
Deep among the dry pine valleys that edged up to the Worldspine north of the Purple Spur,
Hyrkallan watched two dragons land. One of them he knew because it was his own:
B'thannan, an immense war-dragon who could make the earth shake merely by looking at it.
The other one was a stranger, a long slender hunter. An unexpected stranger at that. Hyrkallan
watched from a distance, always cautious until he was sure there was no trick. He sniffed the
air, sweet with resin and fallen needles. Then he crept cautiously out from the undergrowth.
As he came closer, his back straightened, his strides grew longer and he lowered the heavy
crossbow he had gripped to his chest.
'Knight-Marshal!' One of the riders on the back of B'thannan had spotted him. Hyrkallan
squinted. There were two up on B'thannan's back, one tall, one short, and it was the short one
who was waving at him. Shanzir. She always had sharp eyes.
He waved back. 'Shan! Did the queen give us everything we need?' B'thannan was loaded up
with sacks and barrels that hadn't been there when he'd flown off the afternoon before.

Obviously Queen Almiri had agreed to his offer. He wasn't surprised. She had little to lose
and a great deal to gain.
'Food. Weapons. Blankets. Everything,' shouted the other rider. Deremis, his brother.
Hyrkallan peered up. Even though B'thannan was crouched on all fours, Deremis was still
twenty feet up in the air. 'I don't see any alchemists.'
'Oh, they won't help us.' Deremis slid down from B'thannan's back and ran over to embrace
Hyrkallan. 'Not their business, they say. In fact they wish us naught but ill and would have
nothing to do with us.' He grinned. 'Good to see you, brother. I know it's only been a day, but
it seemed it might be a very long one.'
Hyrkallan let his little brother go. 'These dragons have been more than a week away from any
eyrie.' He tried to smile. 'I swear B'thannan has started talking in his sleep. Much longer and
we have to go back. Almiri must know that. If we cannot shelter in any eyrie and we have no
alchemists of our own ...' As if on cue, B'thannan lowered his head and swung it towards
them. His head alone was as big as a horse, with teeth the size of shortswords. The dragon
gave them a baleful look and then stared at its feet. The war-dragon's claws had already sunk
a good foot into the soft earth. If it carelessly flicked its tail, trees would come crashing down.
Deremis punched Hyrkallan in the arm. 'And the gracious Queen Almiri does indeed know
this, and so behold!' He waved at the crates and barrels. 'Enough of their potions to calm a
dozen dragons for a month, taken in secret from the eyries of Evenspire!'
Smiling came easier now. Hyrkallan embraced his brother again. Then he looked at the other
dragon and the three riders on her back. 'And these?'
'Nthandra of the Vale and her mount. She lost many of her family on the Night of the Knives.'
Hyrkallan nodded. 'She's too young, but I won't say np to another dragon. The other two?'
'You know them. Rider Jostan and Rider Semian. They were in South watch until about a
week ago, and then they seem to have decided they should come here.. I found them prowling
the eyries of Evenspire. They were with Princess Jaslyn at the battle of the alchemists'
redoubt.'
'Yes.' Hyrkallan cocked his head. 'I thought Semian was dead. What are they doing here?'
'Been cast out.' Deremis chuckled. 'Said something they shouldn't to Princess Jaslyn and she
threw them out.'
'Riders without dragons and one of them a stiff prick to boot. Still, I suppose they can make
themselves useful. Right.' Hyrkallan hauled himself up onto B'thannan. 'I'll take us to today's
camp then.'
'Is it far?'
Hyrkallan grinned. 'You'll have to wait and see ...' His words fell into silence. Shanzir was
pointing up at the sky. Hyrkallan couldn't see what she was pointing at, but it could only be
other dragons. 'How many?'
'One, I think.'
'Then we'll take it.' A lone dragon out here meant one thing. The Usurper, sending out her
scouts. And still stupid enough to think she can send them out one at a time. Well I'll thank
you later for the opportunity to bloody your nose. 'Are you sure there's only one.'
Shanzir shrugged. 'No. It's coming towards us though.'
'Right.' Hyrkallan nodded. 'Deremis, get the scorpion ready as soon as we're in the air. Shan,
watch in case there are others. Hey!' he shouted across to the other dragon. Underneath all
their dragon-scale armour, he had no idea which rider was which. Presumably the one sitting
at the front was Nthandra of the Vale, if the dragon was truly hers.
The riders turned. They didn't seem to have much with them. Certainly no scorpion.
Hyrkallan didn't bother shouting at them, but made a series of sweeping gestures, signs that
any dragon-knight would understand. Up. Fight. You follow, we lead.

The rider at the front signed back. Understood. They must have seen the interloper too. Am I
the only one who can't? Am I going blind? Best not to think about things like that or all the
other fears of age, though, lest he start worrying about how long it would be before he
couldn't climb onto B'thannan's back without taking his armour off first and having it handed
up to him, piece by piece. He shouted at the war-dragon instead. B'thannan turned on surly
feet and lumbered into a run, rattling the trees with each step until he launched himself into
the reluctant air.
There! He could see it now. A war-dragon. A big one, still coming towards him. Someone
either brave enough and stupid enough to fight outnumbered, or else someone with a friend
lurking. He wondered if he should have let the hunter make its own choices, let it fly low
beneath him and take the enemy from a different angle.
No. I haven't seen their faces. I don't even know who they are. It might be Nthandra of the
Vale under that helm or it might be one of the Usurper's spies. No no, you stay close where I
can see you. He shouted to Deremis: 'Keep an eye on Nthandra's hunter too.' B'thannan was in
his prime, though, one of the best dragons in the realms. Hyrkallan was one of the best riders
and Deremis was one of the best scorpioncers. He shouldn't worry. The Usurper's riders, they
were the ones who should be afraid.
They came closer and closer. Abruptly, the unknown war-dragon turned and started to climb.
Hyrkallan made as if to follow it up. B'thannan's nose came up ...
'Hunter!' shouted Shanzir. Hyrkallan still didn't see it but he wasn't surprised. The Usurper's
war-dragon did have a friend after all.
... and dived down again. Shanzir was wrong; there wasn't just one hunter with the wardragon, there were two, both shooting up from the trees. An ambush, exactly as Prince Lai
laid out in his Principles of War, Except Hyrkallan was supposed to be flying up right now,
blissfully unaware of what was coming from below, instead of down, straight towards the
ambushers.
'Go for the one on the left!' he roared at Deremis and veered B'thannan towards the hunter on
the right. Hunters were faster and more agile, but not when struggling to climb against a wardragon diving towards them. A war-dragon more than twice their size ... Hyrkallan grinned.
He could almost feel their surprise and their fear. The hunters both turned and started to dive
back towards the ground but they were too late. All they managed to do was to expose their
riders even more. He felt the saddle and harness shudder as Deremis fired the scorpion, and
then B'thannan, all fifty tonnes of him, slammed into the back of the nearest hunter. Both
dragons shrieked and then pulled apart. Except now the hunter's riders were in B'thannan's
jaws.
And that's the end of you. Hyrkallan spared a glance for the riderless dragon as it spiralled
down, looking forlornly for its riders and a place to land. Then he looked for the war-dragon.
It was above and behind him, wings tucked in, hurtling towards him. Trying to do to him what
he'd done to the hunters.
Except that doesn't work when my dragon's bigger than yours. Doubtless whoever was on the
war-dragon expected B'thannan to dive and run and for the fight to turn into a chase, but
Hyrkallan was having none of that. He turned B'thannan sharply in the air, facing his enemy
head on. He didn't have time to pick up much speed, but even war-dragons had some sense of
self-preservation. They both swerved and passed each other close enough to touch, belly to
belly; claws and jaws and tails reached around each other, trying and failing to get at the
other's riders.
They flew apart. Hyrkallan glanced over his shoulder. First I ruin your ambush, then I even
the odds and now I have the heights. You must be wondering who it is you're facing. I am
Hyrkallan, dragon-master of the north! Winner of the tournament a decade ago when Hyram
took the Speaker's King. And a decade before that as well, when it was Iyanza. He felt his

harness shudder again as Deremis loosed another scorpion. B'thannan turned and Hyrkallan
saw Nthandra of the Vale swoop past the enemy dragon. She raked it with fire, and then her
hunter managed to wrap its tail around one of the war-dragon's riders and pull, and its whole
harness fell apart. For a moment everything that had been on the back of the war-dragon hung
in the air, one end still held fast, the other hanging from the hunting-dragon's tail. Riders,
scorpions, saddle, everything, all of it stretched out in a line, dangling in the air.
For a moment. Then the dragons pulled apart, the line went taut and snapped, and everything
fell in a lazy cloud of pieces towards the ground.
That's that then. The last of the enemy dragons, the second hunter, was already skimming
away. B'thannan would never catch it and he wasn't about to risk Nthandra. Not after a victory
like this. Let the Usurper hear all about it. Let her send out ever more scouts to look for him.
The war-dragon was heading for the ground now. Nthandra was following it down. She had
every right, since she'd made the kill. Hyrkallan tipped B'thannan skywards once more. Let
her pick up the grounded dragons while he flew circles overhead, watching in case the hunter
came back.
'It's a good day!' he bellowed back to Deremis. 'Three new riders and now three new dragons.
That's twenty wings we have now. We'll have to start our own eyrie soon!' He laughed.
Deremis and Shanzir didn't answer, but that was probably because they hadn't heard him over
the noise of the wind. Or else they had, and he hadn't heard them. He let his eyes scan the
skies one last time, then turned back to them.
Not the wind. Deremis was sprawled away from the scorpion, speared by a shaft half the
length of a man. It had gone right through him and nicked at Shanzir as well, caught her in the
top of the thigh. Blood was everywhere. Hyrkallan blinked, as if that
might somehow make the blood and the scorpion bolt go away. Deremis? My brother? He
couldn't see properly. For a moment he didn't know why. Then he understood. His brother
was dead. He couldn't see because his eyes had filled with tears.
'Shanzir!' He put a hand on her shoulder and shook.
He didn't hear her, but she moved an arm, made a jerky gesture to tell him that she was hurt,
and badly, but that she wasn't about to die. He promptly forgot about her and stretched out
past her for his brother.
'Deremis!' Their harnesses held them both too tightly for him to reach. He couldn't even see
his brother's face, hidden behind his helm.
He hadn't seen the enemy riders fire their scorpion. Couldn't even think when it had happened.
He shook his head. They must have fired as the two dragons passed and pulled apart. He'd felt
the shudder as Deremis had fired. They must have fired back.
He shivered. A foot to the left and Deremis would have been alive and Shanzir dead. A foot
the other way and perhaps he himself would have been hit. Two or three feet and they'd all be
alive. Two dragons passing at speed, in such a way ... A desperate piece of luck to hit a rider
like that, and yet there was his brother, right in front of him. Dead.
Below, Nthandra of the Vale circled over the riderless war-dragon. Someone was going to
have to bring that one home without a harness. Most riders tried that once, when they were
young and stupid and thought they were immortal. Most of them didn't try it again.
I'd do it. Hyrkallan reached out for his brother again. I'd do it for you. But Shanzir was hurt
and someone had to fly B'thannan. As he watched, Nthandra looped her hunter through the
air, dived and almost landed on the war-dragon's back. She pulled up at the last possible
moment, and as she did, one of the riders with her jumped. He landed on the war-dragon's
back and somehow managed to stay there. Nthandra made one more pass and then flew on,
chasing the fallen hunter.

You'd do that would you, old man? He could almost hear Deremis laughing at him. You'd do
that? I seem to remember you tried the same thing twenty-five years ago, before you went fat
and half blind.
You slid off, broke one arm and three ribs and almost got trampled if I remember it right. We
were all very impressed. After we'd finished laughing at you.
'I didn't see any of the rest of you try.' Hyrkallan swallowed hard. Up here, where no one
could see, he could afford to shed a tear and whisper words to the dead. Up here, but not on
the ground. There will be a pyre, my brother. We'll send you on your way as though you were
a king. We'll sing your name and send you to the ancestors, and then I swear to you, one way
or the other, I'll bring this Usurper to her knees.
Later, back among the rest of the Red Riders, Hyrkallan took his brother's armour. They
burned his body and sang old songs of battle and victory and loss. After that, Hyrkallan gave
them leave to celebrate what they'd gained. Three dragons, three riders, an alliance with
Almiri's eyries and a bloody nose for Zafir. Enough to make any young rider drunk with
excitement.
He left them to it and slipped away. Without Deremis, their victories felt hollow. Others
might have drunk themselves into a stupor or lost themselves in Souldust, but Hyrkallan had
no use for such things. Instead he sat alone in his tent, still and straight, and recited the names
of all the riders who had died on the Night of the Knives, all the riders killed by the
Adamantine Men on the Usurper's order. He added his brother's name to the list, and then did
what he did every night. Planned Speaker Zafir's downfall in fierce detail, step by step by step
by bloody step.

4

The Blood-Mage
Jostan hadn't brought a tent with him. He hadn't brought a bedroll or any blankets either, or
indeed anything that might have been useful. Semian was no better off. Nthandra had some
blankets but no tent. They ended up, all three of them, in the tent that had belonged to
Hyrkallan's brother simply because it was there, and because Deremis didn't need it any more.
They watched Deremis burn. Hyrkallan and some of the other riders sang songs and Jostan
sang with them. Nthandra stared at the fire. On and off she wept. Thinking of Deremis
perhaps, but more likely of all the menfolk she'd lost. From time to time Jostan wondered
where he was. He had almost no idea. They'd crossed the Great Cliff and the Silver River
valley and then veered west and then south again. Somewhere near the merging of the Purple
Spur and the Worldspine. That was about as close as he could guess. Somewhere in the
mountains.
Semian stared at the fire as well. Jostan had no idea what he was thinking at all.
When the first flash of the burning was done, Hyrkallan stood up and with a simple gesture he
silenced them all. He raised a drinking horn. 'To Deremis, my brother. Another brave and
noble and honest rider slain.' He emptied his horn. 'I will mourn him as a kinsman should, but
you should not. We are at war, and in war the noble and the brave die. We will be the spark
that ignites the realms. We have a victory today. Three dragons gained and three new riders
too. That is how my brother should be remembered. So I give you another toast, one to
celebrate. I give you Queen Shezira and King Valgar, freed from the dungeons of the
Adamantine Palace. I give you Speaker Zafir's headless corpse rotting on a rope!' He raised

his horn a second time. 'So warm yourselves at my brother's pyre. Know that he died a fine
death and that he would
be proud of what we have done, of what we will do tomorrow, and of what we will do every
day after that.'
Hyrkallan threw his drinking horn into the fire, turned his back and vanished into the
darkness. Nthandra started to sob. Semian stared at the flames.
'It's a strange day,' Jostan muttered.
'He doesn't believe,' whispered Semian. Jostan didn't know what to say to that. Doesn't believe
what? It was hard to feel much of anything except bewildered, and perhaps a little pleased that
he found himself with a dragon again.
Nthandra reached out a hand and rested it on Semian's shoulders. T believe,' she said.
'Oh, believe what?' complained Jostan. When Semian turned to look at him, Jostan wished
he'd kept his mouth shut. In the flickering firelight, Semian looked demonic.
'Rider Hyrkallan does not believe in the name he has given to the men who follow him,' said
another voice, standing behind them. Jostan twisted around and found himself looking up at a
nondescript man leaning on a staff. About the only thing Jostan really noticed was that the
man's hands were scarred and burned and that some of his fingers seemed to be missing. The
man with the staff was looking at Semian, and Semian's face had changed. The expression on
his face was suddenly one of shock, and even awe. Jostan frowned.
'You do though, don't you?' said the man with the staff to Semian. Semian nodded. 'The
problem,' the man went on, 'is that Hyrkallan has no faith.' He crouched between Semian and
Jostan. Now the man's face was closer, it seemed familiar.
'I've seen you before,' said Jostan.
'Yes. We both served the same mistress. I am Kithyr. I served Lady Nastria. I was her bloodmage.'
Jostan felt himself turn rigid with a mixture of distaste and fear and anger. Blood-mage.
Abomination. He half expected Semian to jump to his feet and reach for a sword, but Semian
didn't even blink.
'Rider Hyrkallan chose to call these men his Red Riders because its a common enough piece
of folklore. Everyone knows the stories, little parts of the prophecies, handed from village to
village, from
generation to generation, a little more broken and warped with each telling. The red rider and
the pale dragon. Justice and Vengeance. Mostly they forget the vengeance part. Yes, the red
rider, who flies from town to town, bringing the wicked to justice for their crimes. Everyone
knows that story.'
'But that's not the true story,' whispered Semian, 'is it?'
'Names have a power of their own, don't they, Rider Semian.' The blood-mage smiled thinly.
'In the original revelations the red rider is the herald of the end of the world. The burning of
everything. I don't think Rider Hyrkallan has quite such apocalyptic intent.'
Jostan jumped to his feet. 'Semian, why are you even talking to this ... this creature. You
know what he is! He told you!'
'We saw some blood-magic once,' said Semian mildly. 'Do you remember, Jostan? It was an
alchemist who did it.'
'The queen outlawed its practice! On pain of death!'
'And yet this man worked for her knight-marshal.' Semian shifted closer to the blood-mage
and gripped the man's knee. 'I drank dragon-venom and I survived.'
Kithyr nodded. 'Most people do, actually.'
'I had a vision!'
'Also common, I understand.'

'I saw a priest. And a dragon.' Semian seemed to see Kithyr's hands for the first time. 'His
hands were burned. Like yours, but worse! He told me what I had to do!'
'And what was that?' asked the magician.
Jostan had had enough. He was already half drunk and the last thing he needed was to listen to
Semian going on about his vision again. 'He thinks he's the red rider.' Jostan spat. He expected
the magician and Nthandra to both fall about laughing, but neither of them did. If anything,
they both looked at Semian with even greater interest. 'Did you hear me? He believes it.
Prophecies, end of the world, he believes the lot. He thinks it's him.' There. 'He's crazy. And if
you don't think he's crazy, then you're both crazy too.' He walked away and left them to it. Not
just crazy crazy, either. Dangerous crazy, Cracked. Mad as a bag of spiders. That sort of
crazy. He looked back over his shoulder at the tiny circle of light surrounded by a nearinfinite darkness. The three of them were
huddled together as if they hadn't even noticed him go. Nthandra had draped both arms over
Semian's shoulders now. She'd had her eye on him since they'd arrived, but Semian seemed
oblivious. Close by, other riders sat and stared at the fire; around them, looming mountain
shapes reached up to gouge dead black holes from the starlit sky. Some drank, others sang
softly to themselves. Jostan knew a few of them, recognised more. Several caught his eye and
gave him a nod. One or two waved him over to sit with them and share their drink or their
sorrow. They'd all known Deremis. He was the first of the Red Riders to fall, and none of
them, it seemed, knew quite how to take the news that he was dead. Jostan went and sat
among them for a while, but somehow they were still apart. The Night of the Knives, had
brought these riders together and he'd missed it. While the Night Watchman and his
Adamantine Men had put their brothers and their fathers to the sword, while Queen Shezira
and King Valgar had been taken to be tried for treason, Hyrkallan and these few had fought
their way out of the speaker's palace. With them, somehow, they'd taken Queen Almiri Shezira's eldest, Valgar's queen, mistress of Evenspire and now, because of these few riders,
the fulcrum to end Speaker Zafir's rule if only the right lever could be found. And Jostan had
missed it. Missed it because he was with Semian and Princess Jaslyn at the alchemists'
redoubt, facing something far worse, but he could hardly say that, could he? Hyrkallan's riders
had all lost friends or family or both, and what did he lose? Nothing. Nothing and everything.
They knew, of course. They knew he and Semian had faced the rogue dragons. They knew
about the caves and the smoke and fire and the alchemists and the Embers. They knew that
he'd shielded Princess Jaslyn and that Semian had taken dragon-venom so that, in being eaten,
he might kill one of the dragons. They knew, they just didn't... understand.
They didn't care. There. That was the truth of it. They only cared about Zafir and that she had
tried to murder them. Them and their queen.
When he looked again, Semian and Nthandra and the blood-mage were all gone. He stayed
with the others for as long as he could bear it and then slipped away, back to their tent.
Deremis' tent. He approached it slowly, quietly, not wanting to disturb
anyone inside. If Nthandra was with Semian well then he didn't much care either way, as long
as she gave him some warmth as well once she was done. He was beginning to understand
how she felt. Anything, anything not to be alone.
Sure enough, as he crept close, he heard whispered voices from inside.
'I can feel it. I know it's there.' 'Yes.'
'I need to know. I need to know if I'm right.'
'Yes.' Jostan slipped closer. The first voice was certainly Nthandra. The second didn't sound
much like Semian.
'It is true.' Jostan had almost reached the flap of the tent. He froze. She was with the bloodmage. The thought made him want to be sick. He could almost see her, naked, straddling him
while he pawed at her with his ruined fingers.

'Let me touch you.' No! Don't let him touch you! 'Yes. It is true. You carry a child within you.
You carry a boy, Nthandra of the Vale. You carry your dead husband's heir.'
'What do I tell the child when it's born? That it has no father?'
'Have a few years of joy with him and then see if perhaps the alchemists would take him.'
'They won't. He has a bloodline. Even if he doesn't know it.'
'You could give him to the Adamantine Guard. No one will care whether he has one father or
ten.'
'No! I'd rather cut his throat when he comes out of me than give him to Zafir.'
'The speaker will be long gone by then.'
'I said no!'
'Then tell him whatever you wish. You tell him that he carries all that is left of his father
within him. Make him his father's son. Sit him on whatever throne is his.'
No one will believe me.'
'No.'
Jostan couldn't move. He ought to slip away, come back later, but he couldn't. He couldn't
move forward either. He needed to see and yet was too afraid to look.
'Because behind your back they call you a whore, Nthandra ol the Vale.'
'He'll be a bastard. It's not fair.' Suddenly she was shrieking. 'We were to be wed as soon as he
came back! I was unbroken! I never lay with another man.'
The magician's voice softened. 'It is unfair, but think of this son as a gift. Men such as he are
often born to be great. Destiny has fingered your son, Nthandra of the Vale. Do you want him
to be great?'
'Yes!'
'I can help with the hole inside too. With the helplessness, the hopelessness, the uselessness. I
can help you make all that go away. If you want me to.'
'Yes.' Her voice was quiet now, sobbing. 'Please.'
'Which one, Nthandra of the Vale? I can do only one.'
'The child then,' she said, her voice so broken that Jostan could barely understand her. 'I owe
it to him.'
'Greatness and happiness are rarely the same thing. You know that.'
Jostan didn't hear what Nthandra said next. He wasn't sure if she even said anything at all.
Then he heard the magician again.
'So be it. Will you give yourself to me, Nthandra of the Vale. Your body and your soul must
be mine.'
A real rider, he knew, would have heard enough. A rider like Hyrkallan or Deremis would
burst in on them right now. He knew that. They'd kick the magician out of the tent and send
him packing, either with a boot or with a sword. Nthandra might curse and wail and spit at
them, but they'd do it anyway because it was right. Not because it was wanted, but because it
was right.
And I am not like them. He silently turned and moved a little way away. Too far to hear their
whispers but close enough in case they turned to screams. They didn't. After twenty minutes
the blood-mage came out. He straightened his clothes, brushed himself down. He paused for a
few seconds and looked straight at where Jostan was sitting, invisible, buried in shadows.
Then he went away. Jostan stayed where he was — long enough, he thought, for the magician
to be far away — but before he could bring himself to move, Kithyr was back and now he had
Semian with him. They walked right past him.
'... with this,' said the magician.
'If I must.'
'You must. Unless you are a charlatan like Hyrkallan.' 'It seems wrong.'

'Needs must, Rider Semian. Hyrkallan wears the legend. You must live it. Once you have her,
others will follow. I can see to that...'
They parted at the entrance to the tent. The magician walked away for a second time and
Semian went inside. The noises that began soon after were easy enough to understand. Jostan
waited for them to finish, and then waited a little more before he got up and slipped inside.
The air was hot and stale and smelled of Nthandra. She was lying tight against Semian's back.
From the snores, they were both already asleep. Jostan curled up beside her, close to her
because close felt better. When he woke later on in the small hours of the morning to find her
pawing at him, he didn't even think of turning her away.

5

Drotan's Top
'We need a harness for the war-dragon.' Hyrkallan's face was a mask of stone. Semian
watched him carefully. The other riders had been up late, celebrating or mourning or both. He
couldn't blame them for that; they'd all lost friends; brothers, fathers or lovers. Some of them
were barely awake. Some had wept when they'd burned Hyrkallan's brother, but as for
Hyrkallan himself, his eyes had stayed dry then and they stayed dry now. That deserved
respect, Semian thought, to lose a brother and still stay true to your purpose. In a way, Semian
was glad that someone had died. Not that he had anything against Deremis; he barely knew
the man's name. But yesterday had mixed triumph and tragedy and spared him from more
attention. He didn't want that. Not yet.
'We need ammunition for our scorpions and food for us. And potions,' Hyrkallan continued.
Semian glanced at the piles of barrels and crates that he'd brought from Almiri's eyrie. Good
for a week or two, perhaps, but they needed to fend for themselves.
We need to fend for ourselves, he reminded himself. He was one of them now. For better or
for worse, he wasn't sure. But he had to start somewhere. He was already slowly turning
Nthandra. Others would follow.
'Since none of these things are going to make themselves, we're going to steal them. The
Usurper owns a tiny eyrie on the edge of the Spur. Drotan's Top. Understand this, though.
There's to be no burning, no slaughter unless there has to be.'
Semian pursed his lips and clenched his toes at that. No burning?
'We take what we want and we leave everyone alive when we go. We take their dragons, their
weapons, their food, their potions, everything we can possibly use, but we do not take lives.
Let the
Usurper's servants live to tell of us. Let them spread fear.'
That, at least, Semian could agree with. The Great Flame was coming. Let them tell of us
indeed.
Hyrkallan had already turned his back, heading towards the monster B'thannan. Semian knew
of Hyrkallan's beast — every rider in the north had probably heard of it — but he'd never seen
it until they'd reached King Valgar's eyrie; then Deremis had come for his secret meeting with
the queen, pledging Hyrkallan's support to her if she would pledge hers to him, and
B'thannan's landing had shaken Evenspire to its roots. B'thannan was enormous, by far and
away the biggest war-dragon Semian had ever seen, almost as long as a hunter but three times
as massive. He felt small enough as it was, surrounded by a score of dragons that could crush
him with a careless step.

A pity it's not white. The war-dragon he'd stolen from Speaker Zafir's riders wasn't white
either. There weren't any white dragons. Queen Shezira had managed to breed one as a
present for the viper Jehal but somehow it had broken free. Eventually the Embers had killed
it by poisoning themselves and then being eaten. Or at least that was what people believed.
The white dragon flies free. The flames of destruction have come, and out of the flame, the
red rider shall be born. It will come to me, somehow. Vengeance. And I will ride it.
Any dragon was better than no dragon for now. He and Jostan had left Valgar's eyrie without
mounts of their own and fate or destiny or perhaps sheer blind luck had provided for them.
Fate would provide again, when it was ready. He mounted his stolen dragon and launched into
the air with the rest of the Red Riders. This one would be called Vengeance too.
Hyrkallan led them straight to Drotan's Top. They shot between the white-capped mountains
of the Worldspine, among sharp narrow valleys filled with trees until they reached the Silver
River, a dozen dazzling threads of water knotted and twisted together and gleaming in the sun.
Hyrkallan led them low, the wind wet with spray thrown up by the sheer force of B'thannan's
wings, screaming past Semian's face. As the valley grew wider and the mountains either side
shrank to hills, they began to climb again. In the distance to his right, Semian saw the faint
outline of the Great Cliff, the sheer walls of stone that marked the start of the Purple Spur.
Hyrkallan changed course now, leaving the river behind to rush on to its doom in the caves of
the Silver King's Tomb. They turned south, straight at the Great Cliff, climbing ever higher
until they were a full mile above the ground and the hills of the Blackwind Dales stretched out
below like the wrinkled old skin of some ancient desert mystic. Then the Great Cliff rushed to
meet them. It ripped away the space below and suddenly they were shooting between jagged
peaks of white-capped stone again. Through the neck of the Spur for an hour or more,
skimming over thick carpets of trees and racing rushing water until the mountains fell away
and so did the rivers, and they emerged the other side into the Maze. Here they flew lower
still, sinking among the narrow pillars and canyons carved from dry barren stone. No trees
grew here in the warrens of the Maze, and as they followed the helter-skelter waters from the
Spur downwards, the air grew dusty and warm. Walls and columns of stone flashed by in
streaks of yellows and oranges and reds, punctured now and then by black pits of shadow.
Piece by piece, the stone walls fell away, first one layer, then another, then faster and faster in
a blur until the whole landscape collapsed away and spat them and the waters below into the
abyss that was the Gliding Dragon Gorge, the great rent in the land torn by the might Fury
River below. They crossed the gorge, using it as cover, climbing steadily, creeping up to the
cliffs on the other side so low that the tails and talons of their dragons scraped the stone.
When they emerged on the other side, there it was. Drotan's Top, perched on a long flat
hilltop overlooking the fringes of the gorge. Half a day of flight and then to war with no
warning. That was the dragon-rider's way and it filled Semian with joy.
True to his word, Hyrkallan didn't burn it. Instead he brought the riders in to land. A small
company of Adamantine Guardsmen saw what was coming and fled the landing fields for the
sanctuary of Hyram's Tor, and that was that. No blood shed. Not even a sword drawn. Semian
was disappointed and vaguely disgusted. The Adamantine Guard was supposed to fight to the
last man to defend the speaker and the realms. The last ones he'd met, the Embers in the
alchemists' redoubt, had understood that. They'd understood that even throwing yourself
naked into a dragon's maw could be a victory.
He was still standing at the edge of the landing fields, scowling to himself, when a hand
slapped him on the shoulder.
'Drotan's Top is ours. Not bad for your first day, eh?' Semian turned around. The hand
belonged to an older rider. One with a very slightly familiar face, but no name to go with it.
'I know you,' said Semian slowly.

'GarHannas.' The rider bowed. 'I served Speaker Hyram before he died. I know you too.
Semian. You were at Princess Jaslyn's side at the alchemists' redoubt. You missed the Night
of the Knives, but they say you nearly died anyway.'
'But not quite. I was reborn.'
'Lucky for you!' GarHannas grinned. He obviously had no idea what Semian was talking
about. 'There are a couple of riders and a score of the Adamantine Guard who've locked
themselves in Hyram's Tor. They're trapped and they know it. The alchemist is in there as
well. Everyone else is busy taking everything we can carry from the landing fields, but
Hyrkallan's gone to get the guard out of the Tor. We need the alchemist, or at least his help,
and Hyrkallan doesn't want to burn them.' He grinned again. 'They don't know that, of course.
We'll threaten them with fire and offer them their lives if they surrender. Want to hear the old
man? He's good for this sort of thing.'
Semian shook his head, absently staring up at the tower. Slowly he dropped to one knee.
'Praise to the Great Flame.' He closed his eyes and murmured a short prayer. He felt
GarHannas shift uncomfortably beside him. 'Let the riders standing watch over our captives
hear Hyrkallan speak. I will take their duty.'
GarHannas nodded. He started to move away, but Semian shot back to his feet and put a
warning hand on the other knight's shoulder.
'I'll give you some words for the soldiers you've trapped, though,' he said. 'You can tell them
that those who are devout will be spared. Tell them that those who aren't will be given the
choice: turn their backs on the Usurper and serve the Great Flame or they burn.'
'That's not what — '
Semian ignored him and left GarHannas standing there. He waved to Jostan and Nthandra,
calling them over. He walked to where the Scales and the other men who were now their
prisoners
sat, sullen, scared or simply bemused. 'This lot!' He pointed at the Scales. 'These ones serve
the Order and the Order serves the Great Flame. They have nothing to do with our fight. Let
them go. As for the rest ...' He scanned the prisoners. They were all little people. Huntsmen
and craftsmen and labourers and the like. No one of any consequence.
But that was no excuse. He glanced around. The other riders were gone away now, off to the
tower to hear Hyrkallan storm and bluster. These souls were his.
'As for the rest! You served the Usurper. You are sentenced to die.' He drew out his sword and
counted them as he spoke. Eighteen men and women. Him and Jostan and Nthandra watching
over them. Three riders. If they ran, some of them would escape. That's what you should do
then, isn't it? Why do you stay?
'Hyrkallan said that we should let them go,' said Jostan.
Semian ignored him. 'Or you may choose a different master. Fall to your knees and pray to
the Great Flame. Give yourselves to the fire and you may be reborn. You may live again.
Refuse the fire and die now.'
Nthandra hadn't moved. Her hand was resting on her sword. He took another look around to
be sure. No other rider was close enough to pay them any attention. They were all busy with
whatever Hyrkallan had set them to do.
'Justice and Vengeance!' Semian roared. 'Fire or death!'
They didn't run. They begged and pleaded and cried and one by one fell to their knees,
praying as Semian had told them to do. They were liars though. Semian walked among them,
and as he passed each one, he laid a hand on their head and saw into their heart. One he found,
only one who truly believed. The rest of them were liars, all liars. He wrenched the one soul
worth saving to his feet, pulling him up by his hair, and pushed him towards Jostan.
'Take this one away. We'll deal with him later.'

Nthandra still didn't move. She didn't turn away either. She was here for revenge. They all
were. And the Flame is with me. Masked as a blood-mage, but I know who you are really are,
and you promised Nthandra would be the first. So we will see ...
He went back to walking among his prisoners, waiting until Jostan was out of sight. Two of
us now. The rest of them thought
they were saved. He could feel it. Liars. All liars. As soon as Jostan was gone, he lifted his
sword. And now, truly, we will see ...
'Liars!' he screamed as his blade chopped down. 'You're all liars! Burn in the truth of the
Great Flame!' For a split second, as Nthandra drew her own sword, he didn't know whether
she meant it for him or for them. Then she stabbed a man as he started to his feet and chopped
the legs out from another, screaming at them something that even Semian couldn't understand.
The others ran, but not far. The rest of the Red Riders nearby saw to that with bows and
swords, mistaking the rush of men for an attack. When they were all butchered, Semian
dragged their bodies into a pile. The other riders watched now, faces mixed with curiosity,
awe and horror. As much as anything, Semian knew, this was a lesson for them. They were
young, most of them, the ones that Hyrkallan hadn't taken with him to the tower. Young and
scared and angry. Perfect for his purpose. Some of them had just cut a man down for the first
time. Now they were realising what they'd done. Justice, that was what it was. Hard, cold
justice. They needed to learn that now, needed to learn what it would mean to follow the
Great Flame.
When the pile was done, he called Vengeance. He climbed onto the dragon's back. From up
there, he could see right across the eyrie. The bodies below seemed small and distant, not
really human any more. Semian closed his visor and Vengeance set the bodies ablaze. 'The
Great Flame reclaims its own,' he shouted out. He closed his eyes and let the sound of the fire
wash over him.
'What in the name of Vishmir's cock are you doing?'
Semian lifted his visor and looked down from his saddle. Hyrkallan was back, puffed and out
of breath. GarHannas was with him, and two other older riders that Semian didn't know.
'What happened?' GarHannas looked sickened. 'What did you do? They were common folk.
They had no part in this.'
Semian could only laugh. 'We are all the same before the Flame. Did you take my words to
the tower?'
'Are you mad? The alchemist, the servants and one of the riders have come out. The rest of
them saw what you did and chose to stay inside.'
'Then you should kill the alchemist for serving the Usurper,
and the rider too! The servants from the tower can have the same choice as those we caught
outside!'
'And what choice was that? Get down here, Rider! If you claim to serve Princess Jaslyn then I
am your lord and you will beg me for mercy.' Hyrkallan looked ready to climb up and rip
Semian out of the saddle with his bare hands.
Semian spared him the trouble. He slid to* the ground and spat at the old dragon-knight's feet.
'We are the Red Riders, not some gang of bandits. You should know since you chose the
name. If you don't have the stomach for holy work then step aside for someone who does. I'll
lead them myself.'
'You will not.' Hyrkallan's fist landed on Semian's jaw, knocking him down. The other riders
bowed their heads as Hyrkallan glared at them, one by one. Inside, Semian smiled. He'd seen
their faces light up, if only for a moment. Here and there, embers smouldered inside them.
Kithyr was right. He would have them. Today, tomorrow, the next day, the when didn't
matter; he would have them.
He looked at Hyrkallan as the old knight walked away. And he knows too.

The common folk from the tower were as devious and insincere as the ones outside had been.
Semian couldn't see even one worth saving, but Hyrkallan let them all go anyway. He let the
alchemist go too. The rider though was one of Zafir's. One that Semian knew. One with
nothing worth saving. Even Hyrkallan had to see that. Yet he was merely stripped and
whipped and sent running naked away.
'We are the Red Riders,' Hyrkallan shouted at the tower. 'Take those words to the Usurper you
serve! We will not rest until justice is served.'
'Justice and Vengeance!' shouted someone else.
'Justice and Vengeance!' came another. Hyrkallan spun around, and the riders fell silent.
Slowly he nodded.
Aye,' he said, too quietly for the men in the tower to hear, but the words carried to Semian
well enough. 'And vengeance, if justice alone will not serve.'
They finished looting the eyrie, taking everything they could carry and use and destroying
what they couldn't. When they left,
the tower was still intact. Let them live. Hyrkallan had said. Let them carry my words to
where they need to be heard. Semian smiled to himself. Yours. And mine.
Hyrkallan led them back to their camp in the Spur, never straying far from Semian as they
flew. As soon as they landed, he and GarHannas took Semian away out of sight of the others.
Semian didn't try to resist.
'We've taken another three dragons.' Hyrkallan's voice was a low growl. 'Three more for the
Red Riders, three fewer for the Usurper. Another victory. I will not mar it by a hanging. I
know you, Rider Semian. I know you served Queen Shezira faithfully and well. I know what
you did at the redoubt. So you will merely be flogged, in front of these riders who serve our
cause, and we will cut you down in the morning and you will never disobey me again. If you
do, you will hang. I'll tie the noose around your neck myself. Do you hear me?'
Semian met his stare. 'Justice and Vengeance, My Lord. For the Great Flame never rests and
neither shall its servants.' Hyrkallan shook his head in disbelief and walked away. GarHannas
and the two riders who flew at Hyrkallan's side took hold of Semian. He let them strip him
and then lead him to a tree and bind him to it. He could feel the Flame, burning triumphant in
his heart. The flogging, when it came, was only pain after all, and he was a man who'd been
consumed by fire.
Late in the night when everyone was asleep, when it might only have been a dream, a voice
whispered in his ear. A woman's voice. Nthandra of the Vale.
'I am with you, Rider Semian. I found the alchemist again, as we were leaving.' A
bloodstained knife flashed in the starlight to cut his bonds. 'Justice and Vengeance, Rider
Semian. I hear the words. Justice and Vengeance.'

6

The Unbeliever
Good things never last. Never did, never would. After Drotan's Top, the speaker had to
answer. And answer she did. With dragons in the skies and ...
The last of the soldiers was on his knees, gasping. He had an arrow sticking out of his back.
Hyrkallan snarled and casually kicked him over. Before the soldier could move, Hyrkallan
drove the point of his sword down into the man's belly. The soldier gasped and rolled over. It
would take him a good few minutes and a lot of pain to finish dying, but Hyrkallan didn't care

too much about that. Sell-swords were scum. The realms would be better without them. At
least that was something he could be sure of. As for everything else ...
Three weeks had passed since the heady victory of Drotan's Top. Three weeks of playing cat
and mouse with the speaker's dragons. Three weeks of hiding among the mountains,
achieving nothing, watching everything he'd aspired to slip away. Three weeks to wonder if
he was wasting his time. To think that if he'd stayed in Southwatch, Deremis would still be
alive. Three weeks and he'd lost three dragons back to Zafir's patrols and not one single rider
had come over to his cause. Three good dragons too. Three weeks to wish the Red Riders had
never been born. Three weeks to watch Semian's madness spread a little further every day.
Nthandra, Shanzir, Jostan, Riok and the rest. The young ones who thought they could set the
world on fire. He closed his eyes. Shanzir hurt the most. She was almost a daughter to him.
She flew with him on B'thannan. She was his spotter. She was his scorpioneer now that
Deremis was gone.
Best not to think about that. He kicked the dying man in the ribs and then left him to get on
with it. Over on the far side of the clearing, Rider Hahzyan and the Picker had another pair of
sell-swords and were stringing them up to one of the trees. As he drew closer, he could clearly
see that the sell-swords were dead. One of them had had his belly slit open and his guts were
trailing all over the ground, dirt and pine needles sticking to them. The other had had his head
hacked half off. Hyrkallan was about to ask Hahzyan what he thought he was doing when
another figure emerged from the nearby trees. Kithyr. The blood-mage. Hyrkallan stopped.
He gave the mage a long hard look and a chill ran through him. Evil. We're driven to this. No
wonder they were turning away from him. Now he turned away too. Best to let the mage get
on with his business. Best not to watch.
Hahzyan clearly thought the same. Only the Picker stayed. The Picker was another strange
one. Not a rider, like the rest of them, but he'd shown his mettle on the Night of the Knives.
Hyrkallan had seen him kill two Adamantine Men. No mean feat for a man who didn't even
have a sword.
He shuddered. The Picker was one of Knight-Marshal Nastria's curiosities. So was the bloodmage, and now the old knight-marshal was gone and he was left to pick up the pieces. Both
the good and the bad.
They'd all fought and fled together. The Picker was a killer and the blood-mage was an
abomination, but they were his killer, his abomination, and he was in no position to be
choosy, no position at all. Except ... except, did it matter any more? The last news from
Evenspire warned that the Usurper had called a council of kings. Zafir was putting King
Valgar and Queen Shezira on trial. Hyrkallan had done what he'd done and changed nothing.
He'd already failed, hadn't he?
The blood-mage set to work. Hyrkallan turned away and looked for a more comfortable face.
'Jostan!' Rider Jostan looked on the outside the way Hyrkallan felt on the inside. Disturbed.
That came from spending too much time around Semian.
Jostan hurried over and gave a cursory bow. 'Knight-Marshal.'
'Take three dragons and search the area. There might be more of these shit-eaters. Take
Semian and Nthandra up with you and keep your eyes peeled.' There. That would make life a
little more pleasant for the next few hours. A few months ago, Semian had
been one of those riders who had his head stuffed so far up his arse that he could see out of his
own mouth. And how Hyrkallan missed that Semian. The last thing they needed on top of
everything else was a madman. On the surface Semian had been quiet in the weeks since
Drotan's Top and his flogging. Done as he was told and not spoken out of turn, but he still had
the insane fire in his eyes. He had his converts now too. They gathered around when they
thought Hyrkallan wasn't watching.

The Red Riders weren't doing any good. That was the long and the short of it. After the Night
of the Knives they'd been heady with amazement at being still alive, flushed with the success
of spiriting Queen Almiri out of the palace and back to the safety of her own eyrie. There was
rage too, rage at the Usurper who wore the Speaker's Ring, her and her scheming lover Jehal.
Justice needed to be done and they'd sworn, as riders of the realms, to do it. And what had
they done? Nothing. Burned a few soldiers, stolen a few wagons and spent most of the time
hiding. Drotan's Top, was that really such a victory? They weren't even worth the trouble of
hunting down properly. Did Zafir the Usurper send riders? Did she dispatch the Adamantine
Guard? No, she sent shit-eaters, and poor ones at that. That's what Hyrkallan's riders were
worth. Nothing. Because that's what we've done. Nothing.
Nothing. Not because they were impotent, but because he didn't dare. Because Shezira was
still alive, and he was too afraid to tip the balance of her fate.
He watched Jostan and the other two jog out of the trees towards their dragons. Semian was
limping, almost hobbling. Someone had stabbed him in the leg. Quite a wound by the looks of
it. He had been the only one hurt, but then, when they'd engaged the shit-eaters, he'd led the
charge.
Hyrkallan sighed. The sell-swords hadn't had a chance. If it had been otherwise, he wouldn't
have fought them on the ground. If they'd been at all dangerous then he'd have burned them
from the air. They hadn't been anything more than sport. He clenched his fists. Maybe he
should have burned them anyway. It would be no more than they deserved. But he'd needed
something to fight and burning them from the air would have been too distant, too cold. He'd
wanted to feel his steel crunch on the bones of his enemies for
once. Because you sold your swords to the murdering bitch who calls herself the Speaker of
the Realms and I wanted to see your faces before you died. Because I'm mad. Tablepounding, chair-smashing, see-red mad, and Drotan's Top was three weeks ago and now
Zafir's winning and I need to do something, anything, to feel like we have a purpose.
They'd have to move their camp again. A nuisance but hardly a chore. With dragons to ride,
they could find another place to hide that might be a hundred miles away. The Maze was
huge, the Worldspine endless, and after a while all the mountains looked the same. No one
would ever find them. They'd still be every bit as useless, though.
When the blood-mage was finished, Hyrkallan pretended he was too busy with his other riders
and sent Hahzyan back to see what the mage had to say. In truth, he didn't know what to do
with the abomination. Most likely what he ought to do was kill him out here in the woods.
That would be the right thing to do with one like him, and most likely he was going to regret
that he hadn't. The magician had been with them on the Night of the Knives but did that really
give them anything in common? Likely as not he'd take the Usurper's gold if he knew what
she was offering.
'What's the blood-mage got to say for himself?' he asked when Hahzyan returned. The rider
looked pale. Was it bad then? Glad I sent someone else.
'The speaker has increased the price on our heads. Enough to draw in every sell-sword across
the realms. She now offers her own weight in gold for every one of us. These are only the
first. The Maze will be swarming with them before long.'
Hyrkallan nodded, frowning. He wasn't really interested. 'That's a lot of gold. Too much to be
true.' But then this was Speaker Zafir. Going back on her word to a shit-eater was hardly
likely to trouble her.
'They have to find us first.'
We should give it up. Go home, go back to our eyries. However much he tried to hide it, he'd
lost his heart for this the moment Almiri had told him about the trial. Or perhaps it had gone
when he'd lit the pyre to burn his brother. He could only see one future now. The Usurper

would have her way. His queen would die and there would be war. He didn't belong here any
more. None of them did.
Hahzyan seemed to read his mind. 'We're not wasting our time, Knight-Marshal. Every day,
word of the Red Riders spreads further.'
'And so what if it does?' Red Riders. How I regret wearing that name.
'Others have already come to us: Semian, Jostan, Nthandra ...'
'Three riders, Hahzyan.' Two of them mad, the third fast heading towards it. Still, Hyrkallan
had to smile, if only at the blind enthusiasm. He too had been young and bright-eyed once. A
long time ago, before he'd come to see the full measure of spite in the lords and ladies that he
served.
'Three is more than none, Knight-Marshal.'
'Semian and Jostan should have been with us in the first place. Semian has also quite possibly
lost his mind.'
'But he is a leader. Like you.' And it was true. The more weary and cynical Hyrkallan became,
the more Semian burned. When the time came, and it would be soon, he would tell the other
riders what they wanted to hear. They would listen to him. That, if nothing else, was a good
enough reason to end it while he still could.
They don't need me any more.
'There is GarHannas.'
'Aye.' That there was. GarHannas, who'd served Speaker Hyram. GarHannas was, when it
came down to it, Hyrkallan's one cause for hope. An experienced rider, well known, well
respected and well liked. There was always the dream that others would follow, that
GarHannas was the first, that the trickle would become a flood and riders from across the
realms would flock to the Purple Spur to bring Zafir down. Not much of a hope, but it had
given him something to cling to. For a while.
Who am I fooling? Kings and queens tear down speakers, not riders. I should fly home. Give
up on this charade. Deremis haunted him. His own brother. Killed because of this folly. My
folly.
He wouldn't fly home though. They were all too young, these riders. They needed wisdom. If
he left them and Zafir wiped them out, they'd be nothing except more souls on his conscience.
So instead he watched them pack up their meagre belongings and mount their dragons and
then he led them as he should, between the mountains. He look them north this time, away
from the
majestic dead canyons of the Maze. That's where the sell-swords would assume he was: on
the south side where he could easily reach Drotan's Top and the edges of Zafir's realm. A
dragon-knight would know better, but the sell-swords would think only of feet and boots and
wagons and wheels, not of wings. Maybe that would buy him another week or two of peace
and quiet. Long enough for the Usurper to have her council of kings and its aftermath. Long
enough to see if anyone else would follow GarHannas. And when they didn't, long enough to
talk Hahzyan and the others into going home.
So he took them away, a dozen dragons streaming in a line behind B'thannan, up into the high
valleys where the pines grew thicker, higher still towards the snowline, skimming the
treetops, keeping low to avoid the eyes of Zafir's scouts; then the dive over the Great Cliff, the
mile-high sheer walls of stone that made the northern edge of the Spur, down into the valley
of the Silver River below. Hyrkallan had been flying dragons for thirty years. He'd been to
every part of the realms. He'd spent half his life soaring high above the endless Desert of
Stone and among the dead peaks of the far north of the Worldspine. Even so, crossing the
Great Cliff still took his breath away. The sudden absence of the world below gave him
vertigo and in the dive that came after, the wind roared so fast it seemed it would tear him out
of his saddle. Even behind his visor, he couldn't open his eyes but had to trust to B'thannan

not to simply plough into the ground. B'thannan loved to dive, loved the speed. All dragons
did.
He almost blacked out as B'thannan pulled out of his dive and arrowed above the water of the
Silver River leaving a shock of spray in his wake. And then the moment was gone, the magic
and the wonder, and he was left as he'd been before. Old and bitter. He led the way down the
valley, back to a place they'd been before Drotan's Top, hardly even noticing the hills turn to
mountains as they drifted past. He took them to the far end of the Purple Spur, to where it
merged with the immensity of the Worldspine. Far enough away that the Adamantine Palace
was a full day's flight away. That was enough. So distant that they were hardly a danger to
anyone but themselves. Then he watched them make their camps there, walked among them,
helping them where he could.
He'd keep them here, he decided. Waiting, watching, listening until they got bored. It was all
in the hands of kings and queens now. Another week or so and he could put an end to this
mistake and they could all go home.
He hadn't even put his tent up, hadn't even washed the sell-sword blood off his gloves, when
the revolt began.
'Marshal.' Hyrkallan closed his eyes and wished for strength. Rider Semian.
'Rider.' He didn't turn around. He didn't want to even see Semian.
'Marshal, I think it's time you went home.'
Now Hyrkallan did turn around. His lips curled and he laughed bitterly. 'Really, Semian? You
might be right, but you're the last person I expected to say such a thing. So what do you
propose? Should we wait a little while until the others see the light, or has your little coven
discussed this amongst yourselves already. Shall we all pack up and leave right now?'
Semian shook his head. 'No, Marshal. You should go home. The riders who followed you
here hunger for justice and vengeance. That is what you promised them. Yet you have not led
them against the speaker. We have done nothing except except flap our wings. The speaker
barely knows we exist. Drotan's Top should have been a beginning and you have made it an
end. Since then we've done nothing but wither.'
And you propose?' Why was he asking? Semian was as transparent as glass.
'Princess Jaslyn needs you. She needs a knight-marshal who will guide her with caution and
wisdom. These men need fire and glory and death.' His face was solemn. He believed every
word.
Hyrkallan laughed and shook his head. 'And do you mean to give it to them?'
Semian nodded. 'Yes, Knight-Marshal. I will lead them to glory. 1 will lead them to the
Adamantine Palace itself.'
'No.' Hyrkallan wanted to slap Semian for being so stupid. 'You won't even get close. You
will lead them to their deaths.'
'Then they will be glorious deaths, Hyrkallan. Better than this.'
'No, they will not. Rider Semian; they will be ignoble and barely remembered. You will all be
gone and then you will be forgotten.'
And maybe the realms would be all the better for it He turned away from Semian and tried to
put the man out of his mind. Madness. Madness and death. That should be his mantra, not
justice and vengeance. That was the way of the dragon-priests. If someone set them on fire,
they'd probably rejoice.
For a moment he smiled. Now there was a thought.

7

The Price of Asking
Jostan helped Semian out of his armour. Inside, his left leg was bloody down to his foot.
'It doesn't look too bad.' Jostan scratched his chin. The cut was ragged but didn't seem too
deep and the bleeding had already stopped. Jostan pressed a wad of cloth over the wound and
started to strap it to Semian's leg. 'It shouldn't give you any trouble when it heals. Not like the
arrow that sell-sword left for you.'
That spawned a moment of tense silence. Semian still limped from that and Jostan knew it
pained him sometimes too. Maybe that's why he'd been so keen for a taste of sell-sword
blood.
Semian spat. 'This is absurd.' He clenched and unclenched his fists. He'd be pacing as soon as
Jostan was finished. 'We should have burned those sell-swords. We could have burned them
from the air or from the ground. Why did we have to fight them?'
'It felt good to do something at last.'
'Maybe so, but we should have been fighting Zafir's riders, not shit-eaters. We should have
been fighting them weeks ago.' Jostan tied off the bandage and sure enough, Semian shot to
his feet and started to pace. 'We have a calling, Jostan. We must answer it.'
'You know there's going to be a council of kings and queens. You know he's waiting for that.'
'Which is wrong' Semian stamped his foot and then winced. 'We should be burning the
speaker's eyries. All of them. We should be showing the kings and queens of the realms who
we are. They should fear us. Hyrkallan has to go.'
Jostan looked down. 'Even the Syuss have more dragons then we do,' he said quietly. 'What's
to fear?'
'Hyrkallan needs to go,' said Semian again. He pulled on a light riding shirt. 'Princess Jaslyn
will need him for the war. I told him that. I need to find Kithyr. Wait here for me.'
Semian didn't wait for Jostan to say anything. He pushed his way out of their tent and limped
into the twilight. Jostan watched him go. Hyrkallan won't listen to you. He fyiows you're mad.
He knows you don't give a fig about what happens to Queen Shezira any more. This is
something else for you now. You and all the others who've forgotten why we fly together. He
could have said it too, and it wouldn't have made a jot of difference.
Nthandra ducked into the tent. At least Jostan could understand why she followed Semian.
He'd given her a new family, something to fill the hole.
'Where's Semian?'
'Gone looking for the blood-mage.' Even the word left a sour taste in his mouth. 'He was hurt.'
'Nothing serious. The wound's already closed.' Shanzir and Riok followed her in, and then
Leistar and Mallizan and Joen. Semian's coven. No, they were the blood-mage's coven.
Semian just gave him a voice.
'Is he here? Is he all right?'
'Yes, yes,' Jostan mumbled and watched them sit down. They were all here for Semian not for
him. But why? What do you see in him? Why do you believe in him so? Shanzir still looked
pale from the wound she'd taken when Deremis had died. She was lucky. If a scorpion hit
you, you were dead, and that was that. Almost no one ever got injured by a scorpion. Jostan
had seen the wound in her leg, and it was huge, even though Deremis had taken the worst of
the impact for her.
The Picker and Kithyr came in last. They were at the heart of this, but Jostan didn't have time
to think about that before Semian followed them in.
Kithyr cocked his head. 'So?'

'I told him we should be burning the speaker's palace instead of her filthy hirelings. He said
we wouldn't get close. You will lead them to their deaths, ignoble and barely remembered.
That's what he said.' Semian spat. 'He's too old and too cautious. He doesn't belong here any
more.'
'Is that what you would do, Semian, if you led us?' asked Shanzir. 'Would you lead us against
the palace itself?'
'Yes!' Semian's eyes flared for a moment. 'Yes! Yes, we'd burn her on her own throne.'
'The palace is defended by the Adamantine Guard,' Jostan heard himself say. 'With so few
dragons we'd never get close enough. They would shoot us down.'
The blood-mage closed his eyes. 'Not if they didn't see you.'
'And how could they ...' How could they ndt see us? But no one was listening to Jostan. He
wasn't one of them and they all knew it. They were all looking at the mage.
'How?'
'Is it possible?'
'Could it be done?'
Ripples of wonder spread among them.
Kithyr pursed his lips. Jostan felt a sickening smugness radiate out from the magician, but
none of the others seemed to notice. 'Do you know,' he asked, 'how the dragons were tamed?'
'By potions brewed by the alchemists,' snapped Semian. 'Could it be done or not?'
'You are wrong about that,' said Kithyr softly. 'The alchemists came later. When the dragons
were tamed, there was only blood-magic. In the stories I was taught there were other magics
once, but they went when the dragons came. After that there was blood or there was nothing.
There were no cities of men, no great armies, not even towns. All that existed among what we
called the realms were frightened bands of wild men who were little more than animals,
hiding in the fringes of the world, in the caves and the hills and the mountains and the forests
where the dragons didn't find them. And there were lost places, places left behind by the
sorcerers who had once taught us our craft before they abandoned the world. The greatest
among them were the three fortresses of the Pinnacles. And that is where the dragons were
tamed.'
'The Pinnacles?' Kithyr had their rapt attention now. The Pinnacles were Zafir's palace now.
'That was the greatest of our strongholds. Encased within the stone, the dragons could not
reach us. We laboured always, day and night to find a way to tame them. For as long as we
could remember, we had failed, and yet we laboured anyway and always to no avail. Until the
white sorcerer came to us, that is. He had no
name that we could understand, for he was the last of his kind. He wore armour of
quicksilver. He carried the Adamantine Spear. Where he walked, the dragons obeyed him. He
did not ask our consent to rule us. He simply did. His commands were few, but if they were
not carried out above all other things, he would turn a hundred men to dust with a flick of his
finger. We called him the Silver King. It was the Silver King, not any mortal human, who
tamed the dragons.'
Kithyr paused. He fixed his gaze on Rider Semian. 'There is always a way. In time, the Silver
King took us to a place, to what has become the alchemists' redoubt. To the caves there.' He
smiled. 'What do you know of the alchemists' secrets? There are certain moulds and mosses
and lichens that grow in the caves there, yes. The sorcerer showed us how to make potions
from those that would tame the dragons. But there was more to it than that. It needed a
sacrifice, you see. Blood. Death. A soul.' He smiled again, this time at Jostan. 'You've been
there, Rider. Perhaps you know. The alchemists don't need blood any more. Do you know
why?'
Jostan, despite himself, shook his head.

'No. Because that is where the Silver King taught us his greatest secret, that anything and
everything was possible if the sacrifice was right. Because we blood-mages learned that
lesson well and there and then made a pact. We all gave of our blood and we bound the
demon-sorcerer to our will and took his blood instead. We held him down and split open his
skull and took out his spirit, which was like a luminous silver snake. I imagine he's still there,
still bound by our blood-magic, still pouring his life energies into the potions the alchemists
make to keep the likes of you in the skies. It was hard, the hardest thing we ever did. It cost us
a great deal of our power, all of us. Look at us. Reviled and hated while our little brothers the
alchemists, who were once our apprentices, rule over everything.' He grinned. 'I suppose you
think that it is the speaker who wields the power ...'
Semian stood up and loomed over the mage. 'Can. It. Be. Done?'
Kithyr didn't flinch. He met Semian's eye with a lazy gaze. 'My point, Rider Semian, if you
must have it so soon, is this: If blood-magic can be made to tame dragons and to enslave gods,
why then ves, it can do a little thing such as make men blind. Yes, it can
be done. But there would have to be a ...' Kithyr pursed his lips. 'There would have to be a
sacrifice.'
And here it comes. Jostan sat back to see what would happen. How many of you are actually
ready to die for whatever this is? Because it's certainly not going to be me.
Semian gave a decisive nod. 'Whatever it takes.' He looked at Nthandra, who nodded, and
then the others. They nodded as well. Then he clasped Kithyr's hand. 'Whatever it takes,
Kithyr, we will do. We will bring the speaker to her knees and burn her on her throne.'
One by one they got up and left for their beds. Jostan watched them go in disbelief. Maybe the
ease of today's victory had gone to their heads. Maybe that was it. Maybe that's why they
weren't thinking. The speaker's palace was guarded by two hundred dragons and ten thousand
Adamantine Men. In times of war, the walls and towers could be be lined with five score
scorpions on every side, exactly according to the rules of Prince Lai's Principles. Even a
hundred dragons wouldn't be enough, and the Red Riders had what? Twenty?
'Jostan, walk with me.' Semian was offering Jostan his hand, Jostan stood up. He glanced
uneasily at Nthandra and Kithyr, the last left in the tent. He never felt comfortable leaving
them alone. The blood-mage had had a sickening interest in Nthandra from the very day
they'd arrived.
Semian was tugging him away. 'Leave them, Jostan. I know you mean well but she doesn't
need your protection.'
'She's not even old enough to be called a rider, not really.' But he didn't resist. He let Semian
push him gently outside.
'That's war for you.'
'Are we at war?'
'Yes.' Semian put an arm around Jostan's shoulder, something the old Semian would never
have done. 'We all loved Queen Shezira, but there's nothing we can do for her. We have to
look past that. Zafir will execute her and nothing we do will change that.'
As if you cared. 'Rider Hyrkallan doesn't agree.'
'I lyrkallan should go home. Jaslyn will need riders like him for the war. She needs riders like
you too. And there will be a war, Jostan. The Great flame has shown it to me.'
Jostan felt something inside him break. 'Are you sending me away, Semian? Are you telling
me you don't want me here with you ?'
Semian shrugged. 'You only came because Jaslyn sent us both away. I know how you used to
look at her. I felt the same way for a while. And yes, she's a princess, soon to be a queen, but
in war who knows what could happen? The Red Riders don't mean anything to you, Jostan.
You came because you had no dragon and nowhere else to go. Well now you have a dragon,
and if you go with Hyrkallan then I'm sure Jaslyn will have you back. She will need every

rider she can get. Please understand: I don't want you to go if your heart is here, but it isn't,
and I don't want you to stay while your heart is elsewhere.'
Jostan looked back. Semian was walking them steadily away from the tent.
'Don't tell me you want to be with Nthandra.' Semian shook his head. 'She's not right for you,
Jostan. She's one of us. She's given herself to the Great Flame. She embraces the fire and the
fire brings her joy. Have you given yourself to the Flame?'
Jostan shook his head. 'I don't even begin to understand it.'
'You see. You belong with Hyrkallan and Princess Jaslyn and the riders of the north. What
we're doing here is ...' He frowned, reaching for something. 'It's something special. You were
a good friend, Jostan, almost a brother to me, but do you see how our paths must move apart?
And Nthandra has chosen too. I'm sorry for you that she didn't choose you.'
Jostan closed his eyes. 'She's a girl, Semian.' Even more than Princess Jaslyn was. He wasn't
sure which one he feared for the most.
'Yes. And I will look after her.'
'That's not what I mean. I mean that's not why I'm going to stay, Semian. I'm not going back
to the north, and I doubt you'll rid yourself of Hyrkallan so easily either. But even if you do,
I'm staying with you because I remember who you are and because of what we endured
together. Because you are almost a brother. Because I don't trust your new friend the bloodmage, and I think someone should stay to look after you. Besides, who knows, maybe the
Great Flame will touch even me given time, eh?'
Semian stopped. He shook his head and looked Jostan up and down, and for a moment Jostan
thought he was going to get a rebuke, but then Semian smiled. 'Then you're as good a friend
as I'm likely to find and I shall be proud to fly with you. There may come a time when you
wish to change your mind. You know you can leave whenever you want. We'll give you
everything you need to get back to one of our queen's eyries. I'll even give you a dragon.'
Jostan laughed too. He couldn't help himself. 'You realise you're talking as though the Red
Riders are already yours.'
'Oh, they are.' Semian was still smiling. 'Hyrkallan just doesn't know it yet. He and the others
who haven't been touched by the fire, they'll leave soon enough. But you can stay. I still have
hope for you. Come.' He tugged Jostan into motion again. 'Whatever Kithyr and Nthandra had
to say to each other, I'm sure it's said.'
He was right: the blood-mage was gone when they returned. Nthandra was almost asleep, and
as Jostan and Semian lay down one either side of her, she made no move to go to either of
them. Jostan felt the weight of his arms and his legs and his head pressing him into the
ground. A good fight was always a guarantee of a good night's sleep. The last thing he
remembered was Nthandra's hand, snaking between the blankets, reaching out and holding his
own, squeezing tight. She almost seemed happy. And then the darkness engulfed him and
sucked him down into a place so dark and so deep that he thought he might never escape; and
as he sank he dreamed, and in his dreams he saw his friend Semian, crying out against the
tyrannies of the speaker. He saw riders rally around him, a few at first, then dozens, then
thousands, and among those laces were riders he knew were his friends. He saw the riders rise
as one and descend upon the Adamantine Palace from all sides, an irresistible tide of fire and
scales. He saw the speaker and her lover caught naked and whipped: he saw Queen Shezira
freed and given the Speaker's Ring. He saw the realms rejoice and sleep in peace. And amid
the teeming happy crowds, through the endless celebra-tion, he saw Princess Jaslyn, smiling
at him, reaching out her hand. He saw everything that he wanted to see and he felt a presence
at his shoulder, an old and wise and respected mentor whose name he couldn't quite
remember, whispering softly in his ear.
Do you see? This is how the world should be ...

The dream stayed with him, more real than the waking world, when Semian shook his
shoulder an hour before dawn and told him to get dressed and put on his armour.
'I had a dream,' he said. 'I dreamed that we set the realms to rights.'
In the moonlight he saw Semian smile, no trace of surprise on his face, as if he'd seen it all
too. 'Yes. And that is how it shall be.'
He dressed and then reached out to wake Nthandra but Semian stopped him.
'No, Jostan. Let her lie. Let her sleep. Come. It's time to wake the others.'
In a daze he followed Semian from tent to tent. Everywhere riders awoke with a happy
puzzlement in their eyes and spoke of dreams. They dressed as Semian asked and followed
him until they all stood outside Hyrkallan's tent, waiting patiently. I know what this is, Jostan
thought, and yet it was a dreamy thought, and one that didn't seem to have much weight. He
half noticed Kithyr sidle in among the crowd, the last of them, pale and shaking and yet with a
hungry gleam in his eyes. His head felt full of clouds. Am I drunk?
As Hyrkallan emerged, the riders watched him in silence. Twenty pairs of eyes followed him
as he moved among them. Semian was in the middle, standing awkwardly, tipped slightly to
one side from the wound that Zafir's mercenaries had given him.
'What?' Hyrkallan shouted, when he couldn't bear their stares any more. 'What?'
They were looking at him, not at Rider Semian, but somehow he was their heart. Jostan could
feel it, even in himself. And the blood-mage, standing next to Semian now. Shanzir, Hahzyan,
even GarHannas, who really ought to have known better. Hyrkallan was looking at them all,
sizing them up. Jostan could almost read his thoughts. Why did I do this? Why did I even start
this stupid, doomed crusade?
For Queen Shezira, Jostan wanted to say, to him, but his mouth stayed firmly closed. For the
queen you served for all your life, the queen you love more than anyone can know. Except
me. I know.
Hyrkallan threw his helm to the ground. 'You want glory?' he screamed at them all. 'Then do
what riders have done since time
began and serve your queen. You!' He pointed at one of King Valgar's men. 'Go home. Serve
your queen. When Speaker Zafir turns her eyes to the north, Almiri will need every dragon
Valgar had. You!' He was pointing straight at Jostan. 'Go home and serve yours. Serve Queen
Jaslyn.' Jostan blinked and tried to listen, and yet the words seemed slide over him like water
over a stone, never sticking in his mind, never quite heard. Hyrkallan clenched his teeth and a
shiver of fury ran through him. 'You!' He stabbed at GarHannas. 'Why are you even here?'
GarHannas turned a dangerous shade of red, but he didn't move. Didn't speak.
Jostan bowed his head. Hyrkallan had gone too far. Even he knew it. Screaming and shouting
at young blades like Jostan and Shanzir was one thing. Screaming at someone like GarHannas
only made him look stupid. He'd lost them.
'Lead us, Rider Hyrkallan.' It was GarHannas who spoke. None of the rest wanted him.
Hyrkallan shook his head. 'No. I'm leaving you. I'm going back where I belong. Where we all
belong. I'm going home, and I'm going to serve my queen by making the north so bloody
dangerous that Zafir won't dare lift a finger against a single hair on Queen Shezira's holy
head. You should join me.' He looked straight at GarHannas now. 'You can piss about in the
mountains all you like, but twenty dragons aimlessly burning peasants in the Spur won't even
get Zafir's attention. I'm going, and if I ever have to come back, I'll have the whole fucking
horde of the north with me, five hundred dragons and fifty thousand men. That's where I
should be and so should all of you.'
Jostan was barely listening now. Hyrkallan shook his head in disgust.
Semian spoke so softly that it seemed he was whispering, yet his voice was clear. 'Jaslyn
needs a knight-marshal. Shezira needed a knight-marshal, a proper one, not one who could
barely hold a sword. A marshal who would lead and conquer, not one filled with so much

guile that she was strangled by her own schemes. Lady Nastria is dead, and now you're going
to have what should have been yours a long time ago. You would never have let this happen.'
Hyrkallan's brow furrowed and for a moment he looked lost and confused. Then he shook it
off. 'Sell-swords. Shit-eaters. That's what we're worth to Zafir. She probably doesn't even
know we exist.' He grinned then and laughed. 'If you really want to sting her, burn her eyries.'
He spat. 'Yes, Rider Semian. Go burn her palace. If you can.' They were all still looking at
him in silence. 'A pox on all of you.'
They watched as Hyrkallan left them, great in his day yet now old and worn. No one said a
word. Or maybe GarHannas had said something. Jostan wasn't sure. They all watched
B'thannan fly away into the dawn sky and vanish, and then they stared, lost in thought
perhaps, or lost in wonder, or simply lost.
'Riders!' The crack of Semian's voice jerked Jostan awake. He felt as though he'd been
sleeping and someone had tipped a bucket of water over him. He shook himself and looked
around.
Next to him, Shanzir almost fell over.
'What happened?' she whispered. She looked confused.
A dozen yards away, GarHannas held his head in his hands.
'What have we done?'
'Riders!' shouted Semian again. 'Red Riders! Hyrkallan is gone. He has left us, but we remain.
We are the Red Riders! We were forged together and we will follow our purpose to our death
if that is what the fates demand. I say again, we alone remain! I will lead those who will have
me, and we will take the fight to where it belongs. We will fly our dragons to the walls of the
speaker's palace and we will make her burn! Stay or go, but do it now.'
Most of them stayed. All except GarHannas and a couple of others, who milled around
aimlessly, confused and desolate, only to be herded towards their dragons and sent on their
way with rude haste. Semian couldn't hide his glee once they were gone. He stood with the
blood-mage beside him and smiled, nodding. It made Jostan feel sick. And yet I stay. Why?
He couldn't listen to another of Semian's speeches so he stumbled back towards their tent to
find Nthandra, only to be met by a scream. As he drew near, she staggered out, wearing only a
shirt, her hands pressed between her legs. There was blood running down her thighs. Jostan
froze; his stomach turned to lead. His face and his hands went numb. He felt distant tears roll
down
his cheeks. In a flash, he knew exactly what this was. This was the sacrifice Kithyr had
demanded.
'Oh ...' He couldn't speak. His lips were made of wood and his tongue tasted of ash. He
reached for her and she recoiled, shrieking and wailing like an animal. Then she looked at him
as though he was mad. He wasn't sure, through her grief, that she even knew who he was.
'The blood-mage. He did this.' He shook his head. Any moment now he was going to be sick.
She's just a girl. 'I am so sorry. I knew ...' He was shaking, horror and rage flooding together.
She's too young to be a rider. 'I should have ...' He was after her right from the start, from the
moment we came ... 'I'm sorry, Nthandra of the Vale. It's too late, I know, but I'll stop him,
Nthandra. Whatever it is, I'll stop him.' He sighed and held his head in his hands, then
screwed up his face and screamed at the sky.
No, you won't,' said a voice behind him. An edge burned across his throat. His mouth filled
with something hot and salty and he started to choke. He staggered and coughed and blood
gushed out of his mouth. He turned and then fell over. He could hear singing. The Picker was
standing over him, holding a knife so thin that you could see right through it. Or you could
have, if it hadn't had Jostan's blood all over it.
'Suppose you should have gone with the others.' The Picker shrugged and walked away, and
all Jostan could see was the sky, fierce and bright. The singing was getting louder. He heard

Semian somewhere far away, bellowing promises of blood and fire and victory, and then the
singing swallowed everything.
And then it stopped and there was nothing.

Two

Of Princes and Queens
8

The Lovers
'Can I kill your bride yet?' Speaker Zafir curled her arm around Prince Jehal and stretched her
long neck, tilting back her head, inviting Jehal to sink his teeth into her throat. He duly
obliged, nibbling gently at her skin. A few feet to one side of him was a bed. Their bed, high
up in the topmost room of the Tower of Air, scattered with silk sheets from the silkworm
farms on Tyan's Peninsula. His farms.
'That would hardly be wise, my love.' A few feet the other way was a gaping open arch. More
silk fluttered in the breeze. Beyond that, a tiny balcony; then nothing but air and the hard
ground of the Speaker's Yard a hundred feet below. He liked it up here. For the view across
the palace and the City of Dragons beyond and then the sheer dark cliffs of the Purple Spur
and the glittering rain from the Diamond Cascade.
And yes, for the bed too. Although sometimes, when push came to shove as it always did
when they were alone, he wondered what would happen if he pushed for the window instead.
Two speakers lulling to their death in such quick succession would show such a lack of
imagination though ...
'I was wondering whether to have her poisoned, or whether I should simply slit her throat.'
Tedious, tedious. Jehal put on his best smile. How many times had they talked about this? He
gave a petulant little sigh and stepped away from her, a little closer to the arch and the empty
air. 'Must we go over this again? Lystra is Queen Shezira's daughter. Her other two daughters
are already riled enough. They have well over three hundred dragons between them and they
want your head. The speaker is supposed to weld the realms into a unity of peace and
harmony, not start a war. You should let Shezira and King Valgar go.'
Zafir snorted and turned away from him. 'Let them go, let them go — that's all you ever say.
I'm beginning to think you're far too attached to this new family of yours. Let them go? Why?
So Shezira can wage war on me? I'd rather face the skinny little rag of a daughter that rests so
uncomfortably on her throne. So Valgar can stir trouble on my borders? Let his feeble-minded
wife be the thorn in my side.'
She was flaunting herself, letting him see the slit of her under-gown, the long gash of naked
skin beneath, all the way to the small of her back. She knew exactly what she was doing, of
course. He felt himself stir. 'Not so feeble, my love. She is undoubtedly supporting the Red
Riders.'
Zafir threw back her head and laughed and brushed her fingers over the silk sheets on the bed.
'The Red Riders? Twenty dragons loose on my borders, and so far all they've done is burn a
few peasants. If that's the best she can do then I've no fear of her. No, they're just loose ends
that our idiot Night Watchman failed to clean up when Shezira murdered my husband. Let
them brood in the Worldspine for a few weeks. They'll go home soon enough.'

'They stole five of your dragons and they burned Drotan's Top.'
'And I've already taken three of them back. They tickled my feet, Jehal, that's all. Drotan's
Top was some huts on a hill. And they didn't burn it. They didn't dare.'
'I remember your face when you first heard the news, my love. Dark and stormy as the
Endless Sea.'
She pouted at him. 'They won't be allowed to do it again. The Red Riders are barely even a
nuisance now. I'm inclined to let them be for a while. We can make some sport with them
after I kill their queen.'
Jehal shifted on his feet. 'They make me nervous.' If I were you, I'd stamp on them. But I'm
not, and sometimes it amuses me to watch you falter. He smiled at her. 'Hyrkallan leads them
and he's no fool'
Now she yawned. 'Then he'll know to give up and go home.' 'Don't be so sure, my love. He
might just burn something that matters first.' He moved behind her and ran his fingers along
the
skin of her spine. 'Show some grace. Let Shezira go. Let the cloud of suspicion hang over her
for the rest of her reign. Let everyone wonder whether Hyram fell or whether he was pushed.
The longer you hold her, the more your enemies will rally under her banner. Let her go and
some will start to question her. Your Red Riders will quietly fade and disperse.'
Zafir waved him away. 'The world thinks* Valgar tried to have me killed. I'd look laughably
weak if I let him go.'
Here we go again. 'Fine, fine. Hang Valgar if you have to hang someone. But let Shezira go.'
'She pushed my husband off a balcony.'
'No, she didn't. He was drunk and he fell, and you were glad to be rid of him. Not only is that
something that most of the kings and queens will believe, it happens to be true.' Not quite
true, actually, but that's one little secret I'll keep to myself.
'I want Lystra gone, Jehal. Before she gives birth to your heir. Otherwise I'll have to get rid of
both of them, and that means two assassins and paying twice as much money. Better to get
them both together, eh?'
On some days the window called more loudly than on others. He growled, a mixture of
frustration and desire, pushing the thought away. Not yet. 'I am here, my love. Lystra is far
away, pining for me no doubt, as any woman would, but not actually having me. I am here, I
am yours and only yours. I haven't even touched another woman since you took the
Adamantine Spear in the Glass Cathedral and became mistress of the realms.' Although the
ancestors know how I've been tempted. More and more of late. I might start with your vapid
little sister.
She turned back to him and smiled. It always worked, appealing to her vanity. A hand reached
out and stroked his cheek. 'O Jehal, I find that very hard to believe. Is it really true?'
'You know it is, my love.' He wrapped an arm around her waist and pulled her close again. 'I
have eyes only for you, no matter how far away you are.'
'Mmm. Don't I know it.' She had a lecherous look on now. Almost done.
'If Lystra dies, her sisters will see your hand in it, guilty or not. You've taken their mother,
whom they feared. They grumble and
moan and rattle their swords, but that's all. Take the sister they love and they'll fly straight for
your throat.'
'My throat or yours?' Zafir tipped her head back again. She shivered as Jehal wrapped his
fingers around her neck.
'Both.' He pushed her back, hard and fast enough to startle her, until she was pressed against
the bedroom wall. An arch to either side. See, that's how easy it could have been. His other
hand felt for her knee and then started upward, pushing its way between the silken layers of

her gown. She gave a little gasp and pushed herself into him as he found the heat between her
legs.
'I know how much you like to talk of murder.'
'No. This is just the only way I know to shut you up.' He tugged at the drawstrings of his
trousers. Her hands moved to his, eager to help.
'Then I'm sure we'll talk of murdering your starling-bride again,' she murmured. After that she
didn't say much for quite a while. Not unless the squeals and moans carried some veiled
meaning beyond the obvious.
Afterwards, when Zafir fell asleep in his' arms, Jehal lay awake. He stared at the ceiling of the
great open chamber at the top of the Tower of Air. The walls around them were little more
than a ring of huge arches opening out onto the balcony that encircled the upper level of the
tower. He got up and went to stand in one, naked, teased by the wispy gauze of silk that hung
rippling in the warm breaths of wind that puffed off the plains. Spread below lay the
Adamantine Palace, the heart of the speaker's power. Four huge open yards, each large
enough to assemble two thousand men, and overlooking each yard was a massive tower. The
Gatehouse first, the oldest, the strongest and the largest tower in the palace, where the
alchemists and the Night Watchman and the other senior servants made their beds. Then the
vast space of the Gateyard, lined with stables and barracks. After that, the elegant Towers of
Dusk and Dawn, black granite and white marble, the Fountain Court and the squat bulk of the
Speaker's Tower, the place where the speaker and his or her servants traditionally made their
home. Then the largest space of all, the Speaker's Yard, wrapped around the hulking
misshapen tumour of glassy stone that was the Glass Cathedral. After that, the palace became
a little smaller. The Tower of Air
was the tallest tower in the palace, but it was slender and lacking in space, a fitting monument
to the vanity of the speakers. Finally there was the Circle Court, the azure Tower of Water and
the City Tower. Proper towers again, fit for visiting kings and queens.
Around them all lay the palace walls. Not particularly tall, but they were wide enough to drive
a horse and cart right around them. In fact there were several ramps to allow the Adamantine
Men to do just that when they were putting their scorpions up. More than anything else, that
was what the walls were for: to mount the hundreds upon hundreds of scorpions that would
defend the speaker from the dragons of her enemies. The walls, as of now, were empty. Zafir
hadn't seen fit to deploy her arsenal. That would show the realms that I am afraid, Jehal...
Jehal stood in the wind and chuckled to himself while his gaze wandered and explored the
world outside the palace. Below the low slopes of the Palace Hill, the City of Dragons fed and
decorated itself with the wealth and power that oozed from the speaker's presence.
Somewhere down there too were the barracks of the ten thousand men of the Adamantine
Guard. Past the city, the Diamond Cascade falls poured out from the peaks of the Purple Spur,
the water falling so far that it never quite reached the ground but instead filled the city with a
perpetual misty haze. The bottomless Mirror Lakes glittered and gleamed and rippled in the
breeze. Beside them, the Adamantine Eyrie was currently filled to bursting with riders and
dragons from the realms to the south. Very empty of dragons from the north. Through a
different arch, the Hungry Mountain Plain stretched away to the south, to the chasm of the
Fury River and Gliding Dragon Gorge. Beyond that, far away, lay the warm hills and valleys
and meadows of Zafir's home, and then his own, Furymouth, and the sea, and beyond that,
perhaps, the lands of the Taiytakei sailors and other places Jehal had never seen. To the east,
the plains rolled and twisted into the foothills of the Worldspine, the dominion of the King of
the Crags. To the west, they grew slowly more broken and wooded until they reached the
Sapphire River and then rose sharply to meet the moors and bogs of King Silvallan's realm.
To north, beyond the wall of the Purple Spur, the plains became the great deserts of sand and
stone and salt that wrapped the northern realms.

He looked back at Zafir. I stood here naked once, at the windows, when Hyram was about to
make you a queen, hooking down at all that was going to be mine. If anyone had seen me here
they would have known we were lovers, you and I, and all would have been lost. But they
didn't. He tried to look away but it was hard. Too hard. For all her flaws, she was still
beautiful. I watched you so many times, through the eyes of the Taiytakei dragon. I watched
you writhing and moaning under Hyram, drawing him in to you, and I watched you make
yourself sick each time he left. And I watched you writhing and moaning alone, just for me,
knowing my eyes were there.
So many fond memories. Below them was the room where he'd watched Zafir poison Hyram
and then destroy him as cruelly as she could. Where he'd finished what she'd started and
broken Hyram's mind. Where he'd struggled with himself not to throw Hyram off one of the
balconies when he was done. Here, from this arch, was where he'd watched, that same night,
as Hyram had thrown himself off another one right in front of Queen Shezira, spouting
gibberish about kings and queens who'd been dead for decades.
And now ...
And now he was slowly getting bored. He sighed and his eyes fell away from Zafir's skin. The
Night of the Knives, they called it behind Zafir's back and to her face too. The night Valgar
tried to have her assassinated and Shezira pushed Hyram off his tower, if you were inclined to
believe Zafir's version of events. The night that Zafir imprisoned a king and a queen, the first
time that a speaker had done such a thing in nearly a hundred years. The night that the riders
of the north had fought with the Adamantine Guard and left more than a hundred corpses
strewn across the palace. The night that the Red Riders had been born.
That had been a month ago. The next day, High Priest Aruch had placed the flawless shaft of
the Adamantine Spear into Zafir's hands and her reign had begun. And then ...
And then? And then nothing, that's what. More than a month of kick-ing my heels around the
palace when I should be back in Furymouth, watching over my realm. A month of listening to
Zafir bellyache about Lystra. A whole month of nothing to do except...
Jehal looked at Zafir's naked shape, sprawled out before him.
Well it could be a lot worse, and one must confess to having found a few diversions, I
suppose.
Above the bed, two pairs of ruby eyes looked down at him from the rafters. Jehal stared back
at them. Two golden mechanical dragons, wedding gifts of the Taiytakei, imbued with magics
that let him look through their eyes. Perfect spies and yet now he had no one to spy on. He
had to wonder, sometimes, why they'd given him such precious things, and why he'd given
one of them to Zafir.
No, that wasn't right. He knew exactly why he'd given one to the Speaker of the Realms.
He took another step forward, out onto the balcony until his toes curled over the edge. This
time, if anyone saw him, what would it matter? The whole palace knew they were lovers.
This isn't what I wanted. I thought I did, but I was wrong. He glanced back at Zafir, watching
her chest slowly rise and fall. If I was speaker, what would I do? Bathe in the power, in the
glory, in the knowledge that there was no higher place to be? Yet I see now that the view from
up here was far better when it was forbidden.
Shit.
Of all the things that might have happened, of all the things he'd planned for, of all the fates
that might have befallen him on his path to this place, here was an outcome he'd never
foreseen. He was bored.
Jehal walked back to the bed. He let his eyes linger on Zafir for one last time and listened to
her breathing, slow and untroubled. You understand, don't you? That's why you can't simply
let Shezira go. Because then it would be over. He leaned down and gently kissed her hair.

'Have a care, my lover,' he whispered. 'Listen to your advisers, for they're no fools. And
please let us not become enemies.'
He picked up his clothes, quietly dressed, and slipped away.

9

A Question of Priorities
Vale Tassan, Night Watchman, commander of the Adamantine Men, most feared soldier in
the realms, bowed his head and waited.
'What do you mean, he's gone?' For a moment Speaker Zafir went rigid. Vale thought she
might be about to throw something at him. Speakers came and went and Queen Zafir was the
fourth that Vale Tassan had lived to see. If he'd been permitted an opinion, it might have been
that the others had been immeasurably better. Since he wasn't, he did exactly as tradition and
the law demanded. He bowed precisely as low as was required, ready for whatever orders
would come his way.
'He has left the palace, Your Holiness,' he said calmly and quietly.
'Idiot. Where did he go?'
Vale bowed again. The action was mechanical, a reflex honed over years. He didn't have to
think about it any more. 'To the eyrie, Your Holiness. He went with most of his riders to the
eyrie, woke up Eyrie-Master Copas, demanded his dragons be roused and they all flew away,
Your Holiness. I believe they flew west, towards the Worldspine and Drotan's Top. What's
left of it.' Which put him heading towards the Red Riders, but Vale saw no need to mention
something so obvious.
If anything, the speaker's anger grew. Vale watched, calmly indifferent. Adamantine Men
were chosen almost before they could talk. Usually they were orphans or unwanted children
of poor folk who couldn't afford another mouth to feed. Some were bastard by-blows of
higher-born men, conveniently pushed away to a place where they wouldn't cause any trouble.
In the Guard, blood didn't matter. Everyone was the same. Vale might have been the son of a
king or a fool, but in his own mind he was a son of the Guard,
nothing more and nothing less. He'd stood in shield walls with his brothers, the ones who
managed to stay alive, for more than twenty years. Together they defied the strength and fire
of the dragons. He might have been alone before the speaker's throne but he always felt his
brothers at their posts and at their work, not far away. Queen Zafir's anger meant nothing to
him. He waited, silent and still, for her to send him away.
'In the middle of the night.' Zafir shook her head.
'At dawn, Your Holiness. They flew at dawn. As soon as there was enough light for the
dragons to fly.'
'He hasn't gone west, Tassan. He's gone south. Back to his home and his starling ...' She
hesitated. Vale saw it. Other words had been lining themselves up to come out and she'd
bitten them back. Vale stood motionless and thought about Speaker Hyram. Hyram the clever
and wise. Hyram, who had presided over a decade of peace and prosperity throughout the
realms. Hyram, who for reasons Vale would never know had named Zafir, the least worthy
candidate by far, to succeed him. And who'd been pushed off a balcony for his trouble. He
should have named the King of the Crags. That would have stirred up these fat soft kings we
have nowadays. A proper speaker.
He pursed his lips. That was a thought he should not have had. Zafir wasn't looking at him
though, so presumably she hadn't noticed. She was looking at Prince Tyrin instead. Tyrin was

the fourth or fifth son of King Narghon and Queen Fyon, which made him a cousin of some
sort to Jehal. So much had changed in the last month that Vale found himself alarmingly
vague about who was who. Princes and princesses seemed to come and go and he was starting
to lose track. He supposed he ought to care but somehow he didn't.
The speaker cocked her head. 'And do you know anything about this, Tyrin?' Tyrin was a
decade younger than Jehal and clearly wanted to follow him in every possible way. He was
looking at Zafir right now; his eyes were stripping her naked and he was wondering how long
it would be, with Jehal gone, before she came looking for another lover.
A muscle twitched in Vale's cheek. Were they always so transparent?
Tyrin licked his lips. 'I went to the eyrie with him. He offered to let me ride with him back to
the south but I declined. My place is here, Your Holiness, to serve you in any way I can.' He
half-smiled, half-leered. If Zafir couldn't see what was on his mind then she was surely the
only one in the room.
'Why, Prince Tyrin, did he go?' Her face changed. An almost imperceptible smile, perhaps. A
slight change of posture, a slight widening of the eyes, the raising of an eyebrow. Vale
couldn't say exactly what had changed but the effect was electric. Yes, she seemed to say.
You might yet have me. Even Vale felt it, though the look wasn't meant for him. Tyrin's jaw
hung open. If Tyrin hadn't been sitting down, Vale was sure he would have fallen over.
Instantly, Speaker Zafir had made him her slave.
He felt a grudging admiration. That was what a speaker did. A speaker ruled. This is why we
don't think, he reminded himself. We are the speaker's swords and spears, her shield and
armour. Nothing less and nothing more.
'He may, ah, be gone for some time, I think, Your Holiness.' Which wasn't the question Zafir
had asked at all but Tyrin's mind was too firmly set on one thing to be working properly any
more.
Zafir's face didn't change. No twitch of anger or impatience, despite her rage of only a few
minutes ago. 'Why, Prince Tyrin? What do you think will be keeping him in Furymouth.'
'He said he'd had a premonition, Your Holiness. Someone was going to die, someone very
close to him, he said. He needed to go back, he said. To see if they could be saved.'
'And who was this someone, Prince Tyrin? Did he say?' Vale heard the slightest change in
Zafir's voice. A brittleness beneath the seductive softness. To Vale the danger seemed
obvious. Zafir had set a bear trap right right in front of Tyrin's feet. He wondered if the prince
would manage to spot it.
'His father, King Tyan, I assume. They say he's been getting steadily worse ever since he
returned home.' Vale kept his face still. Well done, little boy. But was that deftness or blind
luck?
Zafir pursed her lips. She sat back into her throne, lounging there with the same affected
boredom as Prince Jehal would have done. And Tyrin too, if he hadn't been so on edge. 'Very
well. Let us
begin then. Away, Night Watchman. Jeiros, dazzle us with news from the Order.'
Acting Grand Master Jeiros, acting head of the Order of the Scales and chief alchemist of the
realms, stepped nervously out in front of the throne. He'd taken a long time to adjust to his
position, Vale thought, but was just now starting to act the part. His predecessor, Bellepheros,
who should have lasted a good few years more, had simply vanished one day nearly six
months ago. Coincidentally, on his way back from Furymouth. Vale supposed that Grand
Master Jeiros had spent most of the first few months expecting his former master to reappear.
'Your Holiness,' he began. He sounded confident these days. 'We are continuing to audit
eyries in an attempt to ascertain whether—'

'Yes, yes, yes. You're still counting dragons, trying to work out whether the one that got away
died or survived.' Zafir straightened and stamped her foot. 'When you have an answer, I'll be
delighted to hear it. Until then, I do not wish to hear daily complaints about how difficult it is.'
'Your Holiness, if you would order a search of the Worldspine—'
'And give Jaslyn and Almiri an excuse to fly their dragons right up to my doors? They might
say they were searching, Grand Master, but that would not be what they were doing. If the
white dragon is dead then it has been reborn to an eyrie. If it isn't, it hasn't. As you are so fond
of reminding us, the number of dragons in the world never changes, so if the white died of
your poisons, you can answer your question by counting them. Counting, Grand Master, is
surely not too great a challenge, is it? Even Prince Tyrin can count. So when you can tell me
that one of them is still missing then I shall listen with more open ears. Until then, no more
excuses, alchemist. Now bring me other news.'
Jeiros paused for a moment. He was angry, Vale saw. That's how far his confidence had
grown. A month ago he would have been quivering. The speaker and her master alchemist
were at odds. In their own different ways they were the two most powerful figures in the
realms. Things like that made Vale uneasy. As Jeiros talked about the rebuilding of the
alchemists' redoubt, Vale carefully catalogued all the other things that made him uneasy. The
Red Riders.
Queen Shezira locked in the Tower of Dusk. Anything about Prince Jehal. The speaker's
council — the council had long ago become a farce, that was worst of all. Three of the
dragon-realms didn't even have a voice and Speaker Zafir was plainly bored by them. Now
that Jehal was no longer present to entertain them with his wit, who would be first to abandon
it? Prince Tichane, who spoke for the King of the Crags? Lord Eisal, who listened for King
Sirion? Prince Sakabian, Zafir's own cousin? One of the others? The alchemists, perhaps? Or
would the speaker herself be the first to go?
Vale, however, was the commander of the Night Watch, and so he would come as he was
called and he would listen, even if it was to the empty walls. Today what he heard was the
master alchemist of the realms explain how they were still rebuilding the redoubt where the
Order made the potions that kept the dragons in check. He heard Jeiros describe in terse detail
the damage that had been done by the smoke that the white dragon had blown into the caves,
the current poor quality of the whatever it was that they harvested in there, their shortages of
men and resources. In a very roundabout way, what he thought he heard was that the potions
that kept the realms alive might soon run short. That a wise man would begin planning now
for a cull of dragons. No one else though seemed to quite hear the same thing. When Jeiros
was done, Zafir batted him away with some scalding remark. No more men would be
forthcoming. The same answer as she'd given him day after day after day for weeks now.
Vale, who had ten thousand soldiers sitting idle in their barracks, couldn't help but wonder
why.
Other men came and went, most of them with little to say of any interest. Vale listened
anyway. A war was coming. It was obvious, and yet no one seemed concerned. The council
was split, Vale decided, into two equal halves. Those who were too stupid to see and those
who simply didn't care.
And then there was him, who would likely be expected to fight it. Presumably none of the rest
of them were that bothered if the odd city full of their own people burned, as long as they kept
their precious eyries. A cull. His heart beat faster at the thought. Would that not be for the
best? At the very least it would make them pause and think.
At last the one man who might have something interesting to say got to his feet. Zaster, the
old palace spymaster. 'Your Holiness, there have been movements among the dragon-knights
of the north.' Even Zafir straightened very slightly. Now she was only pretending to be bored.
'Go on.'

'Princess Jaslyn has left Outwatch and returned to Sand. Several dragons have been seen
heading for the Desert of Salt. She may remain reluctant, but she is negotiating her marriage
with King Sirion's son, Prince Dyalt.'
Zafir glanced at Lord Eisal, who shrugged. 'Shezira promised her to my lord in exchange for
his support.'
'And then murdered Hyram, my husband and your lord, when that wasn't enough.' Zafir
wrinkled her nose and turned back to Zaster. 'And what about Almiri and Evenspire?'
'My spies have seen several dragons flying from the Spur to Almiri's eyrie. And a war-dragon
flying back again, heavily laden.'
'Is that it? You've seen a dragon? I could have told you that myself. My riders have eyes too,
Zaster.'
'Yes. The war-dragon your riders saw, Your Holiness.' Zaster bowed low. 'B'thannan. Rider
Hyrkallan's mount. It confirms that he is leading the rebellion, Your Holiness.'
'Pshaw!' Vale winced. The speaker had half a goblet of wine dangling from her fingers. She'd
been known to throw it at councillors who annoyed her. 'What else? Will you dazzle us with
the revelation that the sun rises in the morning and sets at night? Of course Hyrkallan leads
this insurrection. And Almiri? How much is she helping them? What about Sirion? Does he
send aid to them too? Tell me something useful or be silent. I want proof of these treasons,
not hearsay!'
Zaster had always been too quick to take offence. His lips drew t ight together. He started to
sit down; as he did, Vale found himself rising. It was such a surprise that he didn't quite
understand what was happening at first, and then had to wonder whether some sorcery was at
work. But no, his own legs, nothing more. He looked from face to face, suddenly uncertain.
He wasn't supposed to have opinions, so what in the realms could he he needing to say?
His lcj>s seemed to know what they were doing though, so he extended the same trust to his
mouth.
'Hyrkallan won the Speaker's Tournament a decade ago when Hyram took the Speaker's Ring,
Your Holiness. And a decade before that as well, when it was Iyanza.'
Zafir gave him a scornful look. 'Since when do Guardsmen speak in the Speaker's Council?'
He bowed and fell silent, but he'd done enough. The spymaster nodded. 'When the talk is of
warriors, Your Holiness,' he murmured. 'Hyrkallan is a clever man, a good rider, strong,
brave, with all the best qualities. Most of all he has experience and respect. The other riders of
the north will follow him. They are much more dangerous with him than without, Your
Holiness. As they have already shown.' A thundercloud passed across Zafir's face. No one
spoke about Drotan's Top, but it hung in the air throughout the palace. Hyrkallan had bloodied
her nose there and it still stung, even if she'd bloodied him back since.
'Give me dragons!' shouted Prince Sakabian. 'Let me smash them!'
Zafir glared him into silence.
He's right though. Any other speaker would have summoned a hundred dragons, sent out the
Guard and crushed this nonsense. Zafir does nothing. Why?
Vale felt he ought to have been sitting down but somehow he wasn't. Instead, there were more
words coming out. 'Why is he doing this, Lord Zaster? Why did he not go north all along? He
has the whole of the north as his weapon if he chooses to use it, for they would follow him.
He could force Jaslyn off her throne and come at you with ten times the dragons that follow
him now. Why does he not?'
Zafir glared at him. 'If you'd done what was asked of you, Guardsman, then Hyrkallan and his
Red Riders wouldn't even exist, would they?' She spat the words out. The fingers holding her
goblet were twitching. 'If you'd taken all of Shezira's riders. If you hadn't let Almiri, of all
people, escape. I should have removed you from your post there and then.'
Vale bowed. He sat down.

'They need to be dealt with, Your Holiness,' snapped Zaster.
'You should send Watchman Tassan—' He didn't get any further. Zafir's goblet caught him on
the side of his head. Hard. Zaster staggered and put his fingers to his temple. They came away
bloody.
'You presume to tell me what I should do?' She waved a hand at Vale. 'Send this idiot to finish
cleaning up the mess he should never have allowed in the first place? Now that they have their
dragons? And how many of the Adamantine Guard shall I throw away into the Maze?' She
snorted. 'Very well, Lord Zaster, if they must be dealt with, and if my dragon patrols are not
enough to satisfy you, you deal with them. Hire more sell-swords. Put a bigger reward on
Rider Hyrkallan's head. On all of them. My weight in gold for every one of them. And while
you're at it, they must be getting their potions from somewhere. Get me proof That Almiri is
sending them supplies and I will reduce Evenspire to ash. Let their dragons turn rogue and eat
them!'
Jeiros jumped to his feet. 'Your Holiness, Evenspire is a city of thousands! As large as the
City of Dragons itself! Your dispute—' He bit his lip. 'Our dispute is with Queen Almiri, not
her subjects.'
Zafir snarled: 'Then why don't you find some way to lure her away from her defences, eh,
alchemist? But after you have finished learning to count.' She turned back to Zaster. Her face
softened a little. 'Spymaster, you have not answered the Watchman's question. Why is
Hyrkallan pursuing this foolishness?'
Zaster licked his fingers and shook his head. The look he gave Zafir was venomous. 'Oh I
dare say he'll tire of this soon enough. Without him, I'm sure the rest will disperse.' That
would have earned him the goblet again, if Zafir hadn't already thrown it at him. The speaker
bared her teeth.
'Sell-swords, Zaster. More sell-swords. They are cheap and expendable.'
'Wasn't Rider GarHannas among them?' asked Prince Tyrin suddenly. 'GarHannas of
Bloodsalt?' He was looking at Lord Eisal. Eisal pretended he hadn't heard but the damage was
done. The council slipped back to doing what it did best, sniping at one another and making
sure that nothing useful ever got done. Vale closed his eyes for a moment. Ten thousand men
and two hundred riders sat idle at the palace. If he'd been permitted an opinion, it might have
been that they should be doing something.

10

Jaslyn
'Is there news, Your Holiness?'
Jaslyn sighed and slid off her dragon. Her new dragon with his glittering silvery black scales.
A real prize. Morning Sun, Isentine had named him, but Jaslyn still thought of her old dragon,
Silence, every time she flew. In her head, this new one had a different name. Not morning, but
mourning. It felt much closer to her heart. They sounded the same too, which kept everybody
happy. Her little secret.
She took off her helmet and dropped it on the packed, scorched earth of the landing field. One
of the Scales would pick it up later. 'I wish you wouldn't call me that, Eyrie-Master.' She
didn't even glance back at the dragon behind her. The sun was low and its bulk cast them both
into shadow.
Eyrie-Master Isentine bowed as best his age and stiff back would let him. 'A thousand
apologies, your ... Your Highness.'

'That's all I am, Eyrie-Master. For as long as my mother ... for as long as Queen Shezira is
alive. Even imprisoned within the Adamantine Palace, she is your mistress. You should call
me student and I should call you master.' That had been one of her mother's last commands.
Isentine was getting old and they'd need a new eyrie-master before long. A master or perhaps
a mistress.
She tried to smile but it seemed she didn't know how any more. Isentine stared at his feet.
'Not much,' she said after they'd stood in awkward silence for far too long. 'Hyrkallan has
plundered Drotan's Top. The speaker's dragons have taken a couple of his riders but so far he
evades her grasp. Everyone demands that I call him back and make him knight-marshal in
Nastria's place.' She shook her head. 'We don't even know that Nastria is dead. Almiri begs
and pleads for us to go to war. My husband-to-be is alive and still hasn't found his way
to Sand. His father, King Sirion, continues to shout for revenge for Hyram's death but can't
decide whether it's Zafir or Shezira who should feel his wrath. And I, I just feel that my time
is running out. I want to climb onto Silence and fly away. Far, far away and never come back.
Except Silence is gone.'
Isentine screwed up his face in horror. 'Holiness!'
'Highness!' Jaslyn scowled.
'Highness! You cannot—'
'Cannot speak like that, Eyrie-Master? If not to you then to whom? Our knight-marshal is
dead and our queen is imprisoned for treason. I'm surrounded by men and women I barely
know who wear long stern faces and expect me to be my mother when I'm not. My elder sister
only wants my dragons and my younger sister Lystra is far away, married and a hostage to
that monster Jehal.' She clenched her jaw. Sometimes when she thought of Lystra she wanted
to cry, but that wasn't allowed, not even where only Isentine would see. 'I miss her most of all,
Eyrie-Master. In her letters she, at least, sounds happy.'
'Perhaps, Your Highness, she will persuade ...'
'My— Queen Shezira and King Valgar have been in the speaker's dungeons for more than a
month. Our knight-marshal plotted with King Valgar to murder Speaker Zafir, and our queen
apparently pushed Lord Hyram off a balcony.'
'Lies, Your Highness. All lies.'
'Really ? I want to believe you, Eyrie-Master. But their accusers are not Zafir's servants or
Jehal's. They are Adamantine Men. Perhaps they might be bribed to lie about Nastria, but
about Hyram? They were his own Guardsmen. He died under their watch. They failed. Why
would they lie? I cannot believe they would conspire against their own lord.'
'But surely you cannot believe—'
'What? Can't believe that my mother would have pushed Hyram to his death? After the way
he betrayed her? I remind you, Isentine, of whom we are talking.'
Jaslyn tore herself away from Morning Sun, walking briskly towards the looming tower of
Outwatch. Isentine struggled to match her pace. Walking meant he couldn't see her face. She
wasn't like her mother. She couldn't hide it all away. She couldn't be strong all
the time on the outside no matter what she felt on the inside.
She took a deep breath. 'That's not why I came here, Eyrie-Master, nor why you called me.'
Although any excuse would do. She liked the bleakness of Outwatch, sitting on the top of its
cliff, presiding over miles and miles of tunnels and caves where the dragons were kept. Liked
the flight over endless miles of barren featureless burning sand and rust-coloured stone that
brought her here. Liked this isolated and inexplicable oasis of green that just happened to be
the greatest eyrie in the north. Now that Isentine knew better than to turn out the guard for her
whenever she arrived, it was the windy, lonely, lost place it had always been meant to be, and
it drew her in whenever it could.
'It feels empty here,' she murmured, as much to herself as to Isentine.

'Most of your dragons are at Southwatch,' huffed Isentine. Of course they were. She'd sent
them there, after all, to stand guard over Almiri in case the speaker brought war across the
Spur.
'Yes.' And the few she'd left here spent most of their time in the Worldspine. Wasting their
time searching for the remains of the white dragon that had nearly killed her.
'I might have found the dragon you're looking for.'
The words grabbed hold of her as surely as a strong pair of hands. She froze. For a moment
she thought he meant the white.
'What?'
'There's been another hatchling, Your Highness. A male. A hunter.'
Jaslyn's heart climbed into her mouth. 'What colour?' 'Deep blues and greens, Your Highness.'
Jaslyn started walking again. An overwhelming disappointment settled around her. Not the
dragon she was looking for. Not her Silence.
'But he's a vicious one, Your Highness. He won't eat or drink anything we bring him. He
attacks the Scales. He'll die before the end of the week. I've never met anything quite like it.
We've always had hatchlings that wouldn't take and there have been a lot of them lately, but
this ... this is exceptional. I might even have put him down if it wasn't for your order.'
'Does he speak?'
Isentine didn't reply. As far as the eyrie-master was concerned, it seemed that anyone who
thought dragons could talk probably believed in ghosts and gods and all manner of other
foolishness. It didn't help that the one time Silence had spoken to Jaslyn, as he lay dying, he
hadn't spoken as such; rather, his thoughts had mingled with hers.
Or maybe she was going mad.
Silence had been ash-grey. He was dead now, but in his last thoughts he'd told her that he
would be reborn. He'd told her that dragons lived in an eternal cycle of birth and death. No
one had ever thought to mention this to Jaslyn before, but Isentine had confirmed, when she'd
pushed him, that the alchemists believed this was true. It was a secret passed down among
them, shared only with kings and queens. She was as good as a queen, he'd said, so now she
could know. She'd nearly hit him for that.
They don't remember, though. They don't speak. He'd told her that too. Jaslyn didn't know
whether she believed him or not but she didn't want to, and so she was looking, hoping that
out of all the eyries across the realms, Silence would be reborn to one of hers.
One of my mother's ...
'I'm looking for a sooty grey, Eyrie-Master.' It sounded like madness, but when she'd spoken
to the alchemists, they'd looked at her with shifty eyes as though she'd uncovered some secret
that she wasn't meant to know. Several secrets, in fact. They wouldn't tell her, and when her
demands grew more threatening, they haughtily reminded her that, for now at least, she was a
mere princess, and that the alchemists of the realms answered only to kings and queens. Only
Isentine would answer her questions and she no longer trusted even him.
She walked past the yawning doors that led into the cavernous halls of Outwatch, on to the
edge of the scarp slope. The wind was strong there, tugging at her hair. At the bottom of the
slope was a lake. Above it, caves studded the cliffs, dark holes leading into the tunnels of the
eyrie. She couldn't look at a cave now without a shudder of fear, without smelling smoke,
without starting to cough and choke, but if she closed her eyes she could imagine herself at
Clifftop, Jehal's eyrie in the southernmost corner of the realms. A place almost as far away
from Outwatch as it was possible to be, but
another eyrie built over underground caves and tunnels at the top of a cliff looking out over
water. If she tried, she could bring back the smell and the sound of the sea, of the waves
breaking at the foot of the cliff. Of Lystra, standing next to her, looking around at her new
home with wonder in her eyes and laughter on her lips.

If you were here, I could do this. I miss you, little sister.
She opened her eyes again, dispelling the sound of the Sea of Storms and bringing back the
hot dry desert winds that filled her mother's realm.
'You will take me to this hatchling, Eyrie-Master.' She had to see, after all, even if it wasn't
her Silence. Probably he'd been born in another eyrie, far away. If he'd been reborn at all. If it
wasn't a myth.
'He will try to eat you, Your Highness.'
Through the gloom-laden hall of Outwatch, Isentine led the way to an immense pit lit by
hundreds of alchemical lamps, a hole in the earth fifty feet across with a spiralling staircase
clinging to its side. They went down. He walked slowly, clutching at the guardrail bolted into
the stone. Jaslyn had lost count of the number of times she'd come here, yet she'd never been
all the way to the bottom. They reached the hatchling caves, but the stairs and the pit went on.
She always found herself wondering how many people had slipped and plunged down into the
inky blackness, and whether they were still there, still falling. When she asked Isentine what
was down there, he only shrugged and told her it was flooded, that no one went down there
any more.
He led her off the staircase towards one of the higher caves. Jaslyn clenched her fists until her
knuckles went white and her fingernails gouged her palms. This used to feel like home. She'd
pause and take a deep breath and fill her lungs with the smell of dragons. Now what she
remembered was being trapped underground with dragons trying to kill her and all she ever
smelled was the memory of choking in the smoke.
'The hatchery isn't far, Your Highness.' As if she didn't know. She'd told Isentine everything
because Lystra wasn't here and she had to tell someone. She couldn't tell anyone else. If she
closed her eyes that made things ten times worse; the stench of smoke in her mind grew so
strong that she was almost sick. She tried thinking
of cold mountains and running water but that didn't help either. Nothing helped. Nothing
would. Except maybe if she found the reincarnation of one of the dragons that had nearly
killed her. Maybe then. Maybe when she understood why.
'Here.' The eyrie-master stopped at the entrance to a cavern gouged out of the side of the cliff.
The end of the cave was open to the sky. Jaslyn wanted to run to it, to embrace the sky and the
freshness of the air, but Isentine had a hand on her shoulder. He was offering her something.
'What is this?'
'Against the Hatchling Disease, Your Highness.'
Which she should have known without having to ask. Cross with herself, she took the
ointment from him and rubbed it over her hands and face. It was brown and smelled of mud.
Then she went over to the opening. With the wind whistling around her, the claustrophobia
and the smoke eased away.
A hatchling dragon was chained to one wall. It couldn't have been more than a few days old,
skinny and sickly, but it must have been ten feet long already from the tip of its nose to the
end of its whip of a tail. They came out like that, all scales and bones, usually dark-coloured.
They uncoiled from their eggs like a flower opening from a bud, painfully and slowly.
Sometimes it took them days to stretch themselves out. They'd lie there dozing as their skin
dried and shrank. And then, usually, they'd wake up and eat everything in sight. Unless they
were one of the difficult ones, like this one.
Jaslyn knew at once that this wasn't the dragon she was looking lor.
'It refuses to eat and attacks any who come close to it,' said Isentine. 'The usual for a hatchling
that fails, though more aggressive than most.'
'It attacks them because it's hungry.' Jaslyn looked at the dragon curiously. It was curled up
with its eyes closed, pretending to be asleep. She wasn't quite sure how she knew, but secretly
it was watching them.

'No doubt. But we've had hatchlings like this much more often these last months. Since ...'
Isentine trailed off, but Jaslyn knew what he would have said. Since the white dragon attacked
the alchemists. Since Silence died. He clasped his hands and looked at
the floor. 'They won't eat unless they've made the kill themselves.'
'This isn't Silence.' Jaslyn stepped closer, cautious but curious. The dragon knew she was
there, she was sure of it. And she'd left her helmet up above. The rest of her was still covered
in dragon-scale armour, but if the hatchling spat fire at her face-She didn't have time to finish
the thought. The dragon lunged and snapped its jaws. Fire burst out between its teeth, aimed
straight at her eyes. She ducked and raised her hands to shield herself, but the fire didn't even
reach her and all she felt was a waft of hot air. The hatchling must have been desperately
weak. Then the chain around its neck jerked tight and it collapsed on the floor, seemingly too
drained to move.
'Did you read my mind, little one?' she asked, absently. 'Is that how you knew to strike at my
head? Or was it simply obvious?' She turned to Isentine. 'This one's going to be dead in a few
hours if it doesn't feed.'
The eyrie-master nodded sadly. Jaslyn looked back at the baby dragon. She wanted to stroke it
and nurse it, but even as weak as it was, it was quite capable of biting her arm off. She
crouched down and looked it in the eye, careful to keep her distance.
'Can you hear me in there? Can you understand? Do you remember?' What had Silence said to
her as he was dying. I remember the flames. 'Do you remember the flames?'
The dragon cocked its head and gave her a quizzical look, surprise mixed with hatred. A look
that said Yes. She waited to hear it speak inside her head, but nothing came. They stared at
each other for a few seconds, and then the dragon closed its eyes and laid its head down on
the floor. Maybe she'd imagined it. Just seen what she so desperately wanted to see.
She turned away, away from the dragon and away from Isentine as well. She didn't want
either of them to know of the despair that was welling up inside her. Instead she stared out of
the cave, at the sky and the distant fields.
You delude yourself, little one. You do not understand.
Jaslyn almost jumped out of her skin. She whirled around, but the dragon hadn't moved.
Isentine was looking at her curiously. 'Did you ...' Did you hear? But she could see the answer
to that straight away. No.
'Did I?' He peered at her.
Did I imagine it? 'Bring it something, Eyrie-Master,' she said. 'Something alive that it can kill
for itself.'
'We already have, Your Highness.' She sensed the reproach in his words. Of course they'd
tried. They tried with every dragon, as hard as they could. 'Every—'
'I know, I know. Every hatchling is precious. Do it again. This time, don't let the alchemists
near whatever you bring.'
She still couldn't bring herself to look at him. The tone of the silence was enough to tell her
how much he disapproved of her order.
'They won't allow it,' he said at last.
'Then don't tell them.'.The alchemists would forbid it, she realised. They'd tell her, again, that
she wasn't the queen of this realm and that they answered only to kings and queens. She didn't
even rule her own eyrie. The thought didn't help her, but at least it gave her a little anger,
anger that she could harness into motion. She swept out of the cave, past Isentine and back
towards the pit, heading out to the fresh air and the open skies as fast as she could. The look
the hatchling had given her would haunt her, she knew. Was it the look of a spirit that knew
what was waiting for it, one prepared to die and die and die again, over and over, rather than
become a slave to the eyrie alchemists? Or maybe she was imagining all that, and the look

was simply one of hunger and despera-tion. She'd never know. Isentine would never defy the
Order. By tomorrow, the hatchling would be dead.
When she reached the surface again, a messenger was waiting lor her. 'Your Holiness.' He
bowed, and this time she couldn't be bothered to correct him. 'Rider Hyrkallan has returned to
South-watch.'

11

Little Sister
Lystra stood at the window. This was her window, high in King Tyan's palace, at the top of
one of the towers, in a solar where her husband had once bedded his lovers. The place where
he'd brought her, on their wedding night. The room didn't have much to offer except a
luxurious bed and an extravagant view. Most of the windows in the palace looked south
towards the sea, but here Lystra had found a view that reached out over the walls of the city,
over the sweeping breadth of the Fury River flood plain, and out towards the distant and
invisible north. Sometimes she squinted, imagining that if she tried hard enough she might see
all the way to the Adamantine Palace, to her lover, her husband, her lord, her prince. To the
father of the child growing inside her. He'd been away for a long time. Too long. She was
pining.
Sometimes when she'd had enough of thinking and wondering about Jehal, she'd think about
her sisters instead. Almiri, who was strong and clever. Almiri, who Would always find a way,
somehow, to make everyone happy again. And Jaslyn. She thought about Jaslyn most of all.
Thin, hollow, mean Jaslyn, who burned on the inside with passions clenched tight and buried
deep within her. Starved middle sister.
Jaslyn whom she missed more than anyone else.
She had ladies to keep her company and they amused her well enough. But when she came to
this window she sent them away. Even Lord Meteroa, Jehal's strange uncle, the eyrie-master
who ruled far more than an eyrie, knew better than to bother her when she was at her window.
She was surprised then when she heard footsteps shuffling slowly up the stairs. The tread was
unfamiliar. Not Meteroa, who walked briskly and usually viewed a staircase as a challenge to
he overcome
Little Sister
as rapidly as possible. Not one of her ladies either; they would have coughed to warn her they
were coming.
She let her eyes wander for a last few seconds, dreaming that she would see a speck in the sky
that would be Wraithwing, Prince Jehal's dragon, bringing him home. Then she turned, facing
the door.
The shuffling stopped outside. The world fell suddenly silent. All at once, Lystra was afraid.
'Who's there?' Silence.
With a fluttering heart, Lystra took a step towards the door and then stopped. She could hear
breathing, low and rasping. 'Who is it?'
'Princess Lystra,' whispered a voice, 'do you love your husband ?'
'Who are you?'
'Do you love him, Princess Lystra?'
'Yes, of course.' She took another step towards the door. Lord Meteroa was forever forbidding
her this and that, warning her of the constant dangers of assassins sent by the speaker,

although why the speaker would want her dead was something he could never quite explain.
She'd never paid his warnings much heed. Not until now.
'No,' growled the voice. 'Not the right answer. Do you love him? Does your heart yearn for
him? Would you give yourself away for him, body and soul? Would you die for him?'
'Yes.' She bit her lip. She knew at once what Jehal would have said: Yes, but do I really have
to? Or: Of course, but only when I'm very old, or something like that. He would have made
her laugh. At that moment she wished he was there with her more than ever.
'And he for you.' A figure stepped into the doorway. He threw hack his hood and Lystra
squealed and wept for joy.
'Jehal!' She threw herself into his arms, staggering him.
'Careful, careful!' She couldn't see him properly for happy tears. He held her tight, just the
way she wanted him to. 'Ancestors! Next time I make a surprise return, I shall make sure I
stand a little further from the top of a long and steep and winding stair before I reveal myself!'
'You've been gone for such a long time!'
'Now that is just so typical of your sex,' he chided. 'A prince has to work, you know. Weeks
away without you, far from home, alone and friendless, toiling away for the good of my kin.
Work, work, work, and when I finally limp home, exhausted and saddlesore, all I get are
complaints about how long I've been gone.' His grip on her didn't loosen though, so she knew
he was joking.
'I wasn't complaining.'
'No, well, Lord Meteroa got to me before I could find you hidden away up here, and he most
certainly was. After that, I dare say you could have thrown daggers and chamberpots and
screamed abuse at me and I would barely have noticed.' He pushed her back into the room,
still crushing her to him. 'Oh look, a bed.' His voice turned sly. 'Or did you somehow know
that I was coming back?'
She didn't bother to reply: she was too busy kissing him. And she couldn't have said whether
she was pulling him or he was pulling her or whether the bed was somehow pulling both of
them. She stopped him though, when they were nearly naked, and put his hand on the side of
her belly.
'Feel!' she said, and watched his face. The baby inside was kicking, feeding from her own
excitement perhaps. She watched his eyes light up, watched his mind working, frantically
searching for words and, for once failing. Watched an amazed little smile creep across his
lips.
'Your son,' she whispered.

12

Diplomacy in all its forms
'I'm grateful you came. This used to be Hyram's favourite place.' Zafir stood high above the
City of Dragons, perched on a tiny shelf of rock overlooking the top of the Diamond Cascade
Valley. Hyram had brought her here, before she'd become the speaker. Afterwards she'd come
here with Prince Jehal. Today, she had a king beside her, watching the water rush by,
hundreds of yards beneath their feet. Set back from the edge behind her was a tiny lodge, a
single room squashed under an overhang. From the bottom of the cliff it was invisible; even
from above it was almost impossible to spot unless you knew it was there. It had become a
secret place passed clown from one speaker to the next. One of several, tucked away up here
among the silent crags of the Spur.

T know. We came here often in the earlier days of his rule. Before the shaking sickness took
him.' King Sirion, Hyram's cousin, stood beside and slightly behind her. Zafir made sure that
she was right at the edge. The wind pulled at her. If Sirion wanted to push her over, it would
hardly be any effort at all.
'Shezira came up here with Hyram a few days before she killed him. This is where he told her
that we were to be wed. She must have stood here, beside him, like we are now. She must
have known at that moment he would not name her to follow him. I wonder why she didn't
push him over the edge there and then.'
'Perhaps because she is a true queen, born and bred, forged of steel and honour.' Sirion's
words were stony. 'I do not easily believe these stories of murder.'
Zafir ignored him. 'Before I came here, I thought the Purple Spur was just another cluster of
mountains, like the Worldspine only a bit smaller. It starts that way, over by the Spine. If you
fly across the end of the Spur into the realms of the north, that's what it looks like. But here ...'
She gestured around her. 'It's as though
Diplomacy in all its forms
some god reached down and pulled this part of the world up by the roots. There's nowhere
else in the realms like it. No gentle foothills and valleys, just a sheer cliff all the way around.
And then on the top ... These aren't mountains. Anywhere else and we'd say they were hills.
Canyons. Caves. Snow and waterfalls and gushing rivers. The Diamond Cascade here, the
Emerald Cascade and the Sapphire Cascade. Cold forests. It's like a tiny realm all of its own,
torn up out of the Hungry Mountain Plain. But not mountains, King Sirion. Sometimes, when
you see something from a distance, you do not see it for what it truly is.' She leaned back,
fractionally closer to Sirion. 'I would never have thought Shezira capable of such a murder
either. That she might go to war, yes. I feared that, I admit it. But that she would kill Hyram
with her own hands?' She tried to sound a little mournful, a faint tinge of wistful regret, but
Sirion was having none of it.
'And very convenient for you that he should fall, eh? And I have known both the Purple Spur
and Queen Shezira for many years and have found them both to be exactly what they seemed
from a distance.'
'You are cruel, King Sirion.'
Sirion snorted. 'Don't pretend that your heart is broken, Speaker. You may have fooled Hyram
but it is clear enough to me that you and Jehal were lovers before and are lovers still. I will
not believe in illusions of any affection between you and my cousin. Say your piece, Speaker.
Tell my why you have asked me here, alone and far away from prying eyes. I can think of
only two things, so which is it to be? Do you plan to seduce me as you seduced my cousin? Or
do you mean to murder me? Although I warn you, you will find neither easy.'
Zafir half turned, glancing over her shoulder, and met his eyes for a moment. 'Perhaps I mean
to do both.' 'Then you will fail twice.'
'Very well, King Sirion. I will not trouble you with sentiment, but with cold pragmatism.
Hyram and I had a simple trade.' She turned to face him. 'Am I young, King Sirion?'
'Very.'
'How many children have I carried?'
He took a step back. A frown shadowed his fair. He peered at
her. 'None that are known. Why do you ask such a thing?' 'Do you suppose I am fertile?'
He looked distinctly uncomfortable now. Which, as far as Zafir was concerned, was perfectly
fine. 'I do not know, Your Holiness.' 'Then guess.'
'I ... I suppose there is no reason to think otherwise.'
She took a step towards him, closing the distance between them. 'Am I deformed?'
'I would not say so.' He stepped back, and so Zafir stepped forward again.
'Am I beautiful?'

'Of course.' He tried to step away, but as he did, Zafir caught his hand and pressed it against
her breast. 'Am I desirable?'
He pulled his hand away, but for an instant he'd hesitated. Her heart was beating strong and
fast. She knew he'd felt it. His face coloured. 'I am not to be had, harlot.'
Zafir brushed the insult aside. She smiled. 'I would not presume such a thing, King Sirion, not
from you. But look at me. Look at me with Hyram's eyes. Imagine for a moment that you are
him. Am I desirable?'
'You may well be, Your Holiness. Although I can't imagine why you would ask such a thing.'
'Hyram made me speaker. In return I shared his bed. I would have made him heirs if he'd
lived. He would have kept much of the power that he had. That was the nature of our
arrangement. A simple contract, bound by a marriage. Are not all weddings for the same
reasons? Heirs and power?' She laughed. 'You think I brought you here to bend your ear about
Queen Shezira? No. The Adamantine Men have accused her. I've heard their evidence and to
me it's strong enough to make her hang, but you can all make up your own minds about that.
The kings and queens of the realms will hear the case against her and each of you will make
your own decision. I do not care, King Sirion, what fate awaits her. Frankly, 1 will have as
little part of it as my duty allows. I care only that a decision is reached, and that whatever is
decided is decided by the rulers of the nine realms and not by me. What I care about, King
Sirion, is making sure there is no dragon-war. I care about peace.'
'Peace?' Sirion snorted. 'You?'
'A happy coincidence of duty and self-interest, Your Holiness. You may make your own
judgement as to how securely I sit on the speaker's throne now that Hyram is gone.'
Sirion was frowning. Obviously he hadn't expected such blunt-ness. 'Then why ... ?'
'Why did I bring you here? To ask you a question, Your Holiness. To ask your advice as a
great king of a great realm. I am a queen and I am the speaker. I have carried no children. I
am, as you have agreed, young, fertile and desirable.' She took another step close to him. 'My
husband is dead. I should have the pick of all the princes across the realms. There is certainly
no shortage of them, and more and more arrive at my court with every week that passes. You
see that for yourself and doubtless find many of them as tedious as I do. But they are all
southern princes, from the courts of King Narghon or King Silvallan or King Tyan. The peace
of the realms requires that I marry to the north, not the south. I do not seek a war with
Shezira's daughters, but nor can I marry them.'
Sirion frowned again. He shook his head. 'I cannot offer you any advice. If Queen Shezira had
a son, that would be your answer. There are others who carry her blood.'
'Plenty of them. But I cannot marry into her line if she murdered Hyram. If she were to be
found innocent then perhaps so, but not if she's guilty.'
'Valgar has a son.'
'He's two years old.'
'He has brothers.'
Zafir looked down the sheer drop to the river below. 'That is true. Valgar's realm is small
though.' And now, Sirion, the seed is planted. Although you might be too vain and think
yourself too wise to answer me now, the seed is in there nonetheless. For if I cannot marry
into Shezira's realm, and will not choose Valgar's, then only yours remains. But only if
Shezira is found to be guilty ...
'There is—' She held up a hand and he stopped. She glanced inside. There wasn't much to the
lodge, only a single airy room with open arches instead of windows. At the back were two
wide alcoves, both piled with luxurious furs and soft cushions. 1t wasn't hard to guess what
the visiting speakers had used those lor. She'd
lain in them, naked, with both Hyram and Jehal; flying here again with Sirion she'd wondered
if she might lie there naked again. He reminded her of Hyram though, which was unfortunate.

No. She'd done as much as she could with him. As much as she'd hoped. Now all she could do
was trust time and greed and doubt and pride.
He followed her eyes and must have guessed her thoughts, for his face went hard.
'I—'
She struck first, before he could finish. 'Don't flatter yourself, Sirion. You have an unmarried
son, Dyalt.' 'Promised to Princess Jaslyn.'
'Promised but not yet given. And promises, as we have seen, can be broken.'
Sirion flushed with anger, but before he could say anything else, dragon shrieks ripped
through the air - first one, then another, then several more, answering the first. Cries of
warning.
He jumped away from her and half drew out a knife. 'What trickery is this?'
Zafir barely heard him. Her skin prickled with an acid mix of fear and fury. The cries were
coming from her own dragons, circling overhead, but what they'd seen was flying down the
valley, skimming the waters of the Diamond Cascade River. Three dragons were heading
almost straight at them. They were hard to see at all against the backdrop of trees and water
and broken stone, but they weren't hers. She squinted, paralysed with dread. Her lookouts
were too high. These new dragons would get to her first, before any of her riders could stop
them. If they were here to kill her, she was as good as dead ...
As they rushed towards her, she recognised them. Two of them at least. Dragons that she'd
lost to the Red Riders only weeks ago. They could only be here for her. As they flew closer,
she closed her eyes. They were huge. She was going to die in agony and fire ... No! No no no!
The fire didn't come. When she opened her eyes again, the dragons were flying past right in
front of her, nose to tail, their necks straining forward, their immense wings so wide and so
close that they almost touched the stone at her feet. She still couldn't move,
but then Sirion grabbed her and hurled her to the ground away from the edge an instant before
the wind of the dragons' passing picked them both up and flung them around like a pair of
dolls. The dragons dived over the falls towards the City of Dragons and the palace below.
Zafir rose shakily to her feet and watched them go. She still could hardly move. She touched a
finger to her brow where the skin was beginning to sting. She was bleeding. A scratch, that
was all. If they'd seen me. If they'd known I was here ...
'You're shaking, Your Holiness. You're very pale.' King Sirion touched her shoulder lightly,
awkwardly. She flinched away, ignored him, frantically waving her arms at her own riders
already swooping out of the sky. Within seconds, a hunter thundered awkwardly in to land
nearby. Zafir ran, screamed at the rider to move aside and hauled herself up onto the dragon's
back. Sirion was forgotten. Never mind that he might have saved her life only a moment ago
— for all she knew or cared, the hunter might have crushed him or swept him over the cliff
and into the river below. Before she'd even strapped herself into the rider's harness, she
commanded the dragon to fly. What mattered was her palace.
The dragon felt her need and threw itself over the edge of the Diamond Cascade, soaring out
into the immensity of the void below, into the skies above the City of Dragons.
Streaks of flame flashed across the ground far below. What mattered was her palace, and her
palace was burning.

13

Justice and Vengeance
Rider Semian shot out of the mouth of the Diamond Cascade and into the void beyond.
Vengeance, the dragon he'd stolen from the Usurper, tucked in his wings and fell out of the
sky like a stone towards the city below. The wind roared and screamed in Semian's ears and
tore at his clothes. The wound in his leg hurt; there was a fever in his blood and when he
closed his eyes all he saw was fire and endless burning plains. He whispered a prayer to the
Great Flame. Drotan's Top and three other eyries ringed the speaker's domain and a fifth stood
close to her palace gates. Today they would all burn. Let the kings and queens of the realms
answer the speaker's call and find only ash and embers. The Red Riders, his riders, had
dispersed. They'd flown north and south and east to strike at all the speaker's eyries at once.
And while they do, I will find the heart and cut it out. Hyrkallan, when you hear of our deed, I
wish you could know how I pitied you as I sent you away.
He opened his eyes. The City of Dragons had grown enormous. Vengeance stretched his
wings and opened his mouth wide. Scorching winds blasted Semian's face even through his
visor; the glorious smell of scorched air filled his nose and the city burned. He could feel the
raw strength and power of Vengeance ripple through him and he knew the dragon felt the
same. They were as one, burning bright with righteous fury. See how your ruler protects you.
See how powerless she is? Three or four dragons were in pursuit of him now, guardians
loitering up on the edge of the Purple Spur, but they were behind him. Too far away to reach
him before he himself reached the palace. Fate and destiny had flown here with him and
slipped him between the Usurper's patrols. They were his shield and his armour and they
would protect him from the scorpions of the Adamantine Men too, he was sure. As the walls
of the palace came up meet them, Shanzir and Nthandra peeled
away to either side, striking at the eyrie and the barracks around it. He alone would have the
glory. Vengeance smashed at the walls with his tail as they crossed, lashed a scar of cracked
stone into the greens and blues of the Tower of Water and then let loose, spraying fire in all
directions, cleansing the walls, the earth, the towers, everything within his reach. Men and
women and horses all screamed and burned; servants and beasts, kings and lords, all were the
same when they were made into ash.
Something hit Vengeance and the dragon shuddered and gave an angry snort. From the walls,
soldiers were firing at him, shooting their handful of scorpions. In front of him, a company of
Adamantine Men had formed up with their shields, turning the fire away. Vengeance lashed
them with his tail as he flew overhead, but as Semian raced towards the Tower of Air and the
Speaker's Tower beyond, more and more Guardsmen emerged. A second scorpion bolt hit
Vengeance, and then a third. The dragon shrieked and veered, straining to turn and strike
back. Only Semian's iron desire held him in check.
There! There in front of him were the open doors to the great Chamber of Audience. If the
speaker was anywhere, she should be there. Guards were closing them though, and now
hundreds of soldiers were spilling onto the walls and into the yards, raising their shields,
dragging their scorpions.
It wasn't to be. Another scorpion struck Vengeance in the back of the shoulders, barely a yard
away from where Semian sat, and this time the dragon would not be denied. Flames washed
across the soldiers closing the door and then Vengeance pivoted his head and sprayed the
walls, veering towards them. A few scorpion bolts would never take a dragon out of the air
but they still hurt, and by the time Semian had Vengeance under control again, the moment
was gone. The doors flashed past, still half open, inviting him in, mocking him. With a howl

of rage he urged Vengeance onward, upward. He pulled away from the palace, jaw clenched
with frustration, and finally glanced over his shoulder to see how many of the speaker's
dragons were chasing him.
And saw something wonderful. A miracle of the Great Flame. No dragons were after him;
they were all converging on another. For a moment he thought it might be Shanzir, but no.
Nthandra.
Nthandra of the Vale had set fire to the speaker's eyrie as he'd told her, but now, instead of
flying away, she'd turned back into the palace. Semian felt a strange pang of jealousy and joy.
He saw her dragon almost crash into the doors he'd so narrowly missed, landing among the
soldiers, crushing and scattering them. He saw its head lunge through the doors, smashing
them to splinters, and then he saw fire fill the tower, exploding out of every door and window.
And he saw her die, shattered in her harness by three scorpion bolts at once and burned by her
own fire, erupting back out of the tower. He closed his eyes and prayed for her, offering her
soul to the oblivion of the Great Flame. The first martyr in two hundred years. Saint Nthandra
of the Vale.
He flew south and then west along the Fury Gorge. No one came after him. Kithyr had
promised him that he would be invisible, and so it seemed he was.
His head sang for the rest of that day, even as the other Red Riders returned with failure after
failure. Samir's Crossing north of the Purple Spur was filled with the speaker's dragons and
they'd turned away. Drotan's Top - they'd found to their cost — had been much the same, and
four riders and their dragons were lost. But none of that mattered, and when he told them what
Nthandra of the Vale had done, the other riders all seemed to understand. So they should. The
riders not fit to follow the Flame had returned to the north, or else, like poor Jostan, gone
some other way, willing or not. The ones that were left were the ones that would serve the
Flame to their deaths.
The speaker is dead! The Usurper is slain, and by my command! Was that too much to think,
too much to hope? When he turned to his tent as the sun sank below the hills, he lay in his bed
and stared into the emptiness and prayed. Let her be gone. Let the victory be mine. Let the
standard of the Great Flame burn across the realms! He closed his eyes and tried to think of
the world as he would make it. Where the dragon-priests wielded the power that had once
been theirs, with Semian at their head, the Knight of Fire of myth and legend. Justice and
Vengeance. The visions filled his head as he drifted away.
You cannot rest, whispered the blame as he slept. You cannot rest.
All of it must burn. He tossed and turned in restless dreams and the sun was already high in
the sky when he awoke. He'd missed dawn by hours. In his tent beside him sat the bloodmage, Kithyr.
'You did well, prophet,' said the mage solemnly. He laid cool fingers on Semian's brow.
Semian gripped Kithyr's hand. 'It's just the start. Just the beginning. We have to ...' He tried to
rise but Kithyr forced him to be still.
'You have a fever again. I have told the others to rest for today and so will you.'
Semian lay back on his bed. 'You were right. Everything happened as you promised us it
would. No one saw us until we reached the palace. The Adamantine Men were slow and half
asleep. It was as though they didn't see us until we were already past them.'
Kithyr nodded. 'Blood has power.'
Blood-magic was wrong. Wicked and evil. Or at least so he'd always thought. Before the
Great Flame had spoken to him, Semian wouldn't have suffered a blood-mage to live. Queen
Shezira had outlawed them, as had many other kings. He'd even seen blood-magic once,
wielded by an alchemist. Watching had made him queasy and uncomfortable. Yet that
alchemist had been a servant of the Order, and the Order in its own way served the Great

Flame. He knew better now. Kithyr had shown him. The men who'd first tamed the dragons,
the very first alchemists, they had been blood-mages too. Blood and fire ran together.
'Let me dress your wound again.' Kithyr helped him to sit up and started to unwrap the
bandages on Semian's leg. Semian almost pushed him away but relented at the last moment.
The magician, it seemed, knew a great deal about dressing wounds.
'It's painful this morning.'
The mage nodded. 'It is festering and needs to bleed. I will suck out the corruption and dress it
again.'
Semian rubbed his eyes. He felt weary and lethargic. 'It's getting worse. I don't even
remember how I got it.'
'It is not a deep wound but it is long and ragged and the flesh is torn. It was a sell-sword's
blade that cut you — a fool, coming to a fight with a dull edge on his blade.'
'I don't remember it.'
'You fought with fury. We won. They died. Yours was the only wound we took. What else is
there to remember?'
Semian stretched his shoulders and fought against the growing fuzz in his head. Kithyr had
the dressings open now. His leg throbbed and the air smelled rotten. 'A man should remember
every wound and the person who gives it to him. You never know which one might kill you.'
Kithyr snorted. 'The sell-swords are all dead and I doubt this wound will be your last.'
'Are you sure? I can smell the air. The wound has gone bad.'
'It's been going bad for some time, Rider, but it will not kill you. While I am with you, no
wound will kill you. Now hold your tongue. I have to cut the corruption away. This is going
to hurt.'
'I know. I am not afraid of the pain, Blood-Mage.' He closed his eyes. His belly filled with
anticipation; the pain, when it came, transcended all his expectations. The world he knew fell
away and he found himself engulfed in ice so cold that it burned. He was back in the valley of
ash-covered stone, with the crimson dragon that dwarfed even the Worldspine. With the
dragon-priest with his pale skin and his white hair and his long bloody robes, holding out the
blackened stumps of his hands.
Yes, said the priest. Yes. It is a start, a beginning, nothing more, but it is good. You have done
well.
He tried to talk to the priest, to ask him what he meant, but even as he opened his mouth the
great crimson dragon lifted a wing and slowly blocked out the sun. The sky went dark, the
moon turned black and the world followed and Semian's head filled with the roar of rushing
water.
When he opened his eyes again he was lying on his back, looking up at the roof of his tent.
His leg was agony. Kithyr was bandaging it up.
'I had a vision,' Semian said.
Tm not surprised.' The mage sounded as though he didn't much care for visions. 'You were
right. The wound is getting worse. I had to drain a lot a pus out of it. I've done the best I can.
It will heal now, but you'll be weak and tired for a while.'
'The Great Flame will fill me with its strength.'
'Yes.' Kithyr stood up and nodded. 'It will. It will fill us all. You
may need to lean on someone to walk for a while. You can still ride though, so all is well.'
Semian tried to get up, but the pain in his leg simply wouldn't allow it. 'Yes.' He winced. 'All
is well.'
'The last of your Red Riders came back in the early light of the morning. They brought better
news.'
'Yes?' The riders he'd sent to the further eyries. 'Did they burn?'

'Yes. They burned. The speaker's eastern eyries are reduced to ash. Narammed's Bridge as
well.'
'Great Flame be praised!' Semian sank back to the ground. Those eyries weren't much more
than fields and huts — there probably weren't even any soldiers there — but none of that
mattered. His vision had been true. The kings of the east and the south would come to the
speaker's call. Where they stopped to rest their limbs and feed their mounts they would find
nothing but destruction. They would see her weakness.
He felt dizzy. He closed his eyes again and reached out. The mage took his hand and held it
tight.
'I must leave you soon. You know that, don't you? The Great Flame calls me to a different
destiny.'
'I understand.'
'We all serve the Flame in our own ways. I have done what I can for you. Semian, you must
listen to the words of the Great Flame. It will speak to you in fire, but also in blood. When
blood comes to you, you must heed it.'
Semian screwed up his face. 'I don't understand.'
'But you will. I'll have to bleed you again,' the magician said.
'If you must, but I cannot stay here. We have struck a blow, Kithyr, and many more must
follow. It is a start, a beginning, nothing more.'
The world was getting hazy and starting to spin. The mage squeezed his hand. 'Yes it is. But it
is good. You have done well.'
As Rider Semian slipped away into unconsciousness once more, the blood-mage let his hand
fall. He smiled. 'You did not light the fires,' he whispered, 'but you will fan their flames into
an inferno that cannot be extinguished.'

14

A Prince Has to Do What a Prince Has to Do
Jehal took a deep breath, sighed, and sat down in the middle of the floor to see whether
anyone would even notice. He'd been in Furymouth for two weeks and he was pacing his
palace like an animal in a cage.
Why can't I be content? The coffers in his treasury were full. His city prospered and his
dragons were strong. Cousin Iskan was steering himself comfortably towards a marriage
alliance with one of King Silvallan's brood. Furymouth was easy. A king could put his feet up
here, indulge himself and watch the realm largely rule itself. If that wasn't enough, Lystra was
carrying his heir inside her and yet was still as eager and soft to touch as ever. So why can't I
be content? Why can't I be happy?
Approaching footsteps stopped behind him. Even from the sound of them, Jehal knew exactly
whose they were. His uncle. Meteroa.
'Are you unwell, Your Highness? Or simply meditating? Please don't tell me you've gone
mad. This family has had quite enough of that sort of thing.'
'No, Eyrie-Master, I am trying not to be restless.'
'And have traded that for disturbing your subjects with odd behaviour?'
'Zafir is hurling us all towards a war. I've been trying not to think about it but it's not really
working. She wasn't listening to me. I thought it might be better if I wasn't there to see it
happening any more. No more hammering my head against the stone walls of st upidity that
most of the Speaker's Council seemed to have erected around themselves.' Jeiros was far too

clever not to see what was coming but he was powerless to do anything about it. Jehal was
fairly sure that the Night Watchman, Tassan, could see it too. The man was shrewd lor a
commander of the Adamantine Guard. But
the rest of them ... The rest of them simply refused to see it. He smirked to himself. Maybe
that's because the rest of them haven't met Princess Jaslynfor long enough. He lazily stood up
and turned around. 'Not being there, I have discovered, is considerably worse. I lie awake at
night and think of a hundred and one things that Zafir might do, and none of them are ever
good. I find myself convinced that Zafir will turn everything we achieved to ruin. I ought to
go back.' Why, though? Can't I leave them be? Can't I let Zafir drown in her own stupidity?
He took a deep breath and growled, 'I am bored here, Uncle. This realm runs itself too well.'
Meteroa gave a little bow. 'I shall take that as a compliment. But were you not bored when
you left the speaker's palace? Was that not why you came?' He raised an eyebrow but didn't
wait for an answer. 'No matter; if you're bored then this should please you. I have news.'
Jehal shook himself. Meteroa had a gleam in his eye, one that always meant trouble. 'You
never bring good news, Eyrie-Master. I'm not sure I should listen to you. Lystra, I'm sure, will
have sweeter words than yours.'
Meteroa sounded bored too, but then he always sounded bored. 'Oh, I'd like nothing more than
for you to go and spend a few more days closeted away with your queen. Running this realm
is so much easier when you're not around to interfere.'
'You're supposed to run my eyries, not my realm, Meteroa. Still, if you wish me to scurry
away then by all means tell me I have yet another ambassador from the Taiytakei pleading to
speak with me.'
'They have been a little busy of late.'
'Haven't they just.'
'Always scheming.' Meteroa yawned. 'Should I assume now, as a matter of course, that the
Taiytakei are to be dealt with by the lord chamberlain or some such minor functionary?'
Jehal almost laughed. The lord chamberlain was supposed to be the eyes and ears and voice of
the king. Strictly, even Jehal had to defer to the chamberlain's orders, although the last
chamberlain to try that had retired from his office in something of a hurry some years back.
'What a fine suggestion. I sometimes wonder if we should give them a hatchling. Or an egg or
two. Let them live with the consequences.'
'My Prince! As you have so pointedly observed, I am your eyrie-master, and that is the worst
treason to escape even your lips for a good long time. I should be fleeing as fast as I could to
send word to the speaker and the grand master of the alchemists.' He shook his head. 'That
you should even speak it. Jeiros would shriek for your head at the mere whiff of such a thing.'
'Oh pish-tosh! I wasn't advocating we should give them any potions. Only a hatchling.'
Meteroa was still glowering. Jehal sighed. "Well I thought the idea of one of their ships
drifting back into port with nothing left alive except an awake and very hungry dragon was
rather amusing.'
Meteroa's look was acidic. 'A veritable earthquake of hilarity, I'm sure. But no, Your
Highness. It is not the Taiytakei. This is news that concerns your bride and it will not wait.'
'Oh well, now I am suddenly quite convinced that I shall not like whatever you're so eager to
say. I should warn you that I have been considering breathing new life into certain ancient
traditions regarding the bearers of bad news.'
'Then I shall dress it up otherwise. Wondrous news, Your Highness. The speaker has called a
council of kings and queens. Oh joyous, joyous times.'
Meteroa's voice was so dry it could have swallowed the sea. Whatever good humour Jehal had
been nursing left him right then. 'She's putting Queen Shezira on trial, isn't she?'
'Yes. And King Valgar too.'
'Oh screw Valgar. Inconsequential king with an inconsequential voice.'

'But with a not-inconsequential queen, Your Highness.'
'Yes, yes, married to Lystra's big sister. You didn't suppose such a thing would slip my mind,
did you? But still inconsequential beside Shezira.' He clasped his hands tightly together. 'Zafir
will demand Shezira's head and she'll probably get it. Jaslyn will take Shezira's throne and
Almiri already speaks for Valgar's realm. Put the two of them together and they're as strong as
the King of the Crags. Put Sirion with them and they'll split the realms clean in two. War, fire,
death, destruction. Everything burns.'
'Perhaps.' The eyrie master raised an eyebrow. 'However, I
cannot help but observe that it will likely all happen very far away from Furymouth.'
'Furymouth may be far enough removed, Eyrie-Master, but / am not. I am precisely in the
middle.'
'And very adroitly done, Your Highness. I bow to your talent for blending strategy and
mischief. A lover on one side and a bride on the other. You may jump to one or the other as it
pleases you. As the tides of their fortune wax and wane and they quietly rip each other to
pieces.'
Jehal could have slapped him. 'You are naive and short-sighted sometimes, uncle. If they rip
each other to pieces, it may be of little consequence to us, but it will not be quiet. It may be a
surprise to you, but I would prefer not to see the realms torn to shreds, and that is most
certainly what such a war would do. You might as well give the Taiytakei that hatchling and
the potions to go with it. That might be all that's left.' He paced. 'Since I intend to follow Zafir
to the speaker's throne, I would prefer to rule more than a desert of ash. No, I shall stand
between them.'
'Not choose between them, My Lord?' Meteroa raised an eyebrow.
'I have made one speaker, Eyrie-Master. When I make another, it will be me. No.' Jehal
pursed his lips. 'No choosing. Not yet. I shall answer the speaker's summons and attend her
council. I shall argue with passion and conviction that the realms will be safer if Queen
Shezira lives. And then we shall see.'
'I'm afraid to say, Your Highness, that you are quite pointedly not invited to the council. Your
father may attend and his voice will be heard. Not that anyone, even if he is able to speak on
that particular day, will understand a word of what comes out. You, however, are courteously
advised to stay home and keep feeding the starlings. Whatever that is supposed to mean.'
Jehal hissed. 'Oh! Believe me, Eyrie-Master, the speaker could not have made her meaning
more clear. Nevertheless.' He looked at Meteroa long and hard. 'Zafir can do what she likes
with King Valgar, but if she executes Shezira, both of Lystra's sisters will go to war. That
must be stopped.'
Meteroa raised an eyebrow. 'I trust that Princess Lystra and I will no longer be hearing
complaints of boredom?'
Jehal suddenly grinned. 'That depends on how long it takes me to change Zafir's mind. You
may go, Eyrie-Master.'
Alone, Jehal's grin fell away. He stared blankly into space. He'd put Zafir on the throne. He'd
always known he might not control her but he'd never given it much thought.
And now it's time that I did. He turned and walked briskly towards his father's apartments.
Something else was long overdue, something to which he'd given a great deal more thought
over the years. Something best done quickly while he had the will to do it. When he reached
his father's rooms, he sent all the servants away with orders to find Lord Meteroa and bring
him. He waited until they were all gone and then stepped inside, through the antechambers
and into his father's sickroom. A long dark room, lit only by the embers of the hearth and thin
curtains of sunlight that squeezed through the cracks in the shuttered window. A room he'd
come to less and less over the years. I used to come here every day, in the beginning. I'd hold
your hand and look for any signs that you were getting better, filled with a strange melange of

fear and hope in case there would be a miracle. But you weren't and there wasn't. You were
always getting worse and miracles, it turns out, are for fools.
Prince Jehal sat by his father's bed and took his father's hand. He leaned towards the old man's
ear.
'I know you can hear me,' he whispered, soft as silk. 'I know your mind is still alive in there,
even while your body wastes away. Even though you can't speak, can't feed yourself, can't do
anything much but lie there and stare, I know you can hear me. If there's anything you have to
say, this is your last chance to say it. Spare me the complaints that I never come to see you
though. I know I've not been a good son, but then a better son might have come from a better
father, eh. I have to go away again now. Queen Zafir is waiting for me. I made her want me,
Father, and now I might have to destroy her. I did the same to her mother, Aliphera. Does that
make you sad, Father? I know you liked Aliphera. I think you'd like Zafir better though. She
squeals like a pig. Oh, I'm sorry.' Jehal gently wiped his father's brow. 'I suppose I shouldn't
speak of such things. Do the women I send to your bed still give you any pleasure? I hope so.
I picked them myself.'
He paused and squeezed his lather's hand, stretching his senses
for any response. He thought he felt a twitch, but that could simply have been his father's
condition. It could have been anything. Most likely it was nothing.
He whispered again. 'I don't know if you've been keeping track of things in there, but if you
have, you must know that Speaker Hyram's time as master of the Adamantine Palace has been
and gone. He's dead now. Did anyone tell you that? He went mad with grief and despair, with
the help of a little cocktail of poisons that I made for him, and then he threw himself off a
balcony. You were my key to him, Father. You and Zafir. I couldn't have done it without you.
Pathetic, drooling, shaking, empty shell of man that you are. You let him see what time had in
store for him, until the dread of it gnawed at his bones. Until the terror of age and impotence
and helplessness ate his heart. Well he's gone now, your old enemy. You survived him and
you had a good part in killing him. I thought you'd want to know that. I thought you deserved
to know why I let you linger like this for so long.'
Jehal rose. He had tears in his eyes. 'I've killed one queen and one speaker and made another
of each. Because of me yet another king and queen are marked to die. I'm sorry, Father, I
really am, but I had to. I know you understand. But I am not sorry for this, for what I'm about
to do. I should have done it a long time ago. I should never have let you suffer so.'
He looked into his father's blank eyes, searching for something, for any little spark. They were
dull and dead. The only sign of life was the slow rise and fall of his chest. With deliberate
slowness Jehal picked up a pillow and pressed it hard into his father's face, until the breathing
stopped. He held it there for a very long time. There was no struggle. A mercy. For both of us.
Finally, Jehal lifted the pillow away. He looked at his father's dead face for one last time. 'I do
wish you could have told me, just once, that you were proud of what I've done. That I'm not a
monster like Calzarin.' He stroked his father's cheek, cold as glass even when he'd been alive.
'But you didn't and now you can't any more. Go and be with your ancestors. Maybe now
you're dead you can watch over me as you never did while you were alive.'
Jehal took a deep breath, and when that wasn't enough to stop his head spinning he took
another. He put the pillow carefully
back on the bed and laid his father's hands across his chest. As an afterthought, as something
to do while he waited for his heart to stop racing, he threw open the shutters and let daylight
flood the room. In the sunlight his father's skin was so pale that it seemed to glow.
'Sent away, summoned back, sent away, summoned back. I do wish you'd make up your mind,
Your Highness ... Oh.'
Jehal spun around. Meteroa was in the doorway. He had the audacity to disturb him here
instead of waiting outside. Jehal put a trembling finger to his lips. 'Not a word, Eyrie-Master,

not another word. In this moment and this place, you're a sneer away from losing your head to
the sharpness of your own tongue.'
Meteroa's face was a mask hidden under a mask. For a long time he stood stock still, staring at
the dead king. Then he bowed. 'You're going north?'
Jehal nodded. 'Lystra stays here, under your protection. Whatever happens to her happens to
you. As before.'
'He was my brother, Your Holiness.' Meteroa's face was still blank. Jehal barely heard him.
'I'm leaving right now. From this room I will get my white horse. I will ride to Clifftop as fast
as it will carry me and I will fly tonight, in the dark, whether Wraithwing agrees with me or
not.'
'And what shall I tell your queen?'
'Tell her what she needs to know. Tell her that I am sorry, but that sometimes a prince has to
do what a prince has to do. Now get out! When I'm gone, see to my father.'
Meteroa backed away, vanishing into the shadows outside the door. Jehal spared his father
one last look, and then followed as fast as he could. All the way to the palace, and I will not
look back, for now I am a king and my voice will be heard.

15

The Duty of Kings
Jeiros, acting grand master alchemist, cracked opened his door, peered into the empty
passageway beyond and slipped out like a schoolboy. A little voice in his head mocked him
for his stupidity. This wasn't going to achieve anything. Someone was going to see him
sneaking around in the dark like this and get suspicious. If he'd just gone where he was going
in broad daylight, no one would bat an eyelid.
The little voice didn't stop him though. It only made him even more careful. You forget, he
told himself, that I've done things life this before.
When you were ten years old, snapped the voice. When you were a little boy and it was what
all little boys did.
He reached the end of the passage where it opened out into a stairwell. The Gatehouse was
actually two towers, one either side of a pair of wooden doors called the Dragon Gates. The
gates themselves were bigger than some castles. They were close to fifty feet high, which
made them twice as tall as the walls around most of the palace. They were bound with iron,
and when closed and locked it took a hundred men about an hour to open them. When they
were fully open, they were large enough for any dragon in the realms to walk through.
He chided himself. That's an exaggeration. He peered into the blackness of the stairs and
opened his ears, listening for any footsteps. When he didn't hear any, he tiptoed down. The
alchemists lived on the upper levels of the east stair. Where he wanted to be required that he
went all the way down to the bottom, across the gates, and then all the way up the west stair.
And all of it without being seen.
Back to the gates. The gates gave him something else to think about. They were, in their own
quiet way, a miracle. They weren't
The Duty of Kings
hinged because no one had ever made a hinge remotely big enough or strong enough. Instead,
they pivoted on a bearing, with huge iron and lead counterweights balancing the mass of the
doors. Except even that wasn't enough, because no one could make a bearing that would take
such a weight without collapsing, so most of the weight of the doors and the counterweights

was held up by a series of steel ropes that then rested on a pair of massive stone pilings either
side of the pivot. It was said that when the palace was built, some three hundred years ago, the
gates took as long to build as the rest of it put together. The Gatehouse towers were as large as
they were because they had to be to support the gates. Sometimes the alchemists joked that
the maze of rooms and passages and staircases the towers contained were just something to
fill all the spare space.
There. He was at the bottom of the stairs and no one had seen him. So far. He unlocked the
door into the Gateyard, opened it, locked it again and slipped into the warm night air. No one
was watching, but still, this was where one of those mythical potions of invisibility would
have come in handy.
He hurried across from the east tower to the west. There was no avoiding the guards who
stood by the gates — the gates within the gates that allowed people and horses and even carts
and wagons to come and go without ever having to open the Dragon Gates themselves. But in
the darkness, with his hood pulled up, they wouldn't know who he was. He steered a wide
course around them and no one challenged him. Pitiful, sneered the little voice. As if any of
this mattered.
Except it did matter. It mattered a lot. He opened the door to the west stair. That was one door
that was never locked, for it led into the quarters of the officers and senior staff of the
Adamantine Men, and no one would be daft enough to go into a place like that unless they
had a very good reason to be there. Jeiros ran up the stairs as fast as he could, almost to the
top, and banged on a door. He was afraid that he might have to bang several times, given the
hour, but the door swung open of its own volition. It wasn't even shut.
'Grand Master.' The Night Watchman was sitting in a hard-backed chair, tilting back with two
bare feet up on a little table, squinting at a book that he was holding at arm's length from his
'I thought you'd be asleep.'
'We never sleep, remember?' Vale Tassan slowly leaned forward, took his feet off the table
and replaced them with the book. Jeiros wasn't sure whether he meant it as a joke or whether
he was serious.
'You need a Taiytakei eyepiece,' he said, to change the subject.
'No, I don't.' A slight smile played across Vale's face. 'I need books to be scribed with bigger
letters. The Night Watchman cannot wear an eyepiece.'
'He can in the privacy of his own chambers.' Jeiros stepped in and closed the door behind him.
When he turned back, Vale was giving him a very pointed look.
'And what, exactly, is this privacy to which you refer, Grand Master? As you see, my door is
always open to my men and my friends.'
'Well it's shut now.' Jeiros looked for a bolt or a lock but there wasn't one. 'I require a moment
or two of your attention, Night Watchman.' His scowl softened and he bit absently on a
knuckle. 'I need an ear, perhaps.'
'Then go and see Aruch.' Vale shook his head and made to settle back down with his book.
'No. I need your ear, Night Watchman. Who do you serve?'
'What an odd question.' Vale cocked his head and then rose slowly to his feet. 'I serve the
speaker, Grand Master. I am her sword and her shield. I execute her will and her enemies.
That is my whole and only purpose. Would you like a drink? I don't myself, but I sometimes
have visitors who do. I have a collection of fruit wines that I'm told is very good, and it seems
a shame for them to go to waste.'
'No!' Jeiros took a few quick steps into the room and looked around for a place to sit down.
All he could see was a chair by a table covered in maps. He took another step towards it and
felt a hand on his arm, turning him, pulling him away.
'That table is for Adamantine Men,' said Vale quietly. 'Have my chair. I will squat on the
floor. I'm quite used to it.'

'Do they teach you history when they make you a soldier? I don't suppose they do.'
'They teach you how to fight and how to die for your comrades,'
said Vale mildly. Then he looked up at his walls, covered in bookshelves, books and scrolls,
and made a gesture with his arm. 'However, I have undertaken extra study over the years.'
'Do you know how the Order of the Scales came to be?'
Now Vale smiled. 'No. I know at least half a dozen different stories which claim to be of how
the Order of the Scales came to be. All of which disagree, and all of which are provably false,
at least in part. Do you know, Grand Master? Which story have you come to sell me tonight?
Is it the one where the alchemists are nothing more or less than blood-mages with a different
name? Is it the one where you slew them or the one where you chased them away? What are
you today? Are you noble heroes or dark villains?'
Jeiros clenched his fists. 'Let me tell you who we are. We are the ones who keep the dragons
at bay. Not you, not the speaker, not the kings and queens of the nine realms. Us. Without us,
none of the rest of you matter a whit. You'd all be dead in a flash. Yes, we are descended from
blood-mages. Our power has its root in theirs. We are descended from those who sided with
the men who became the kings and queens of the realms when the blood-mages were broken.'
Vale smiled amiably. 'All the stories I have read say that the blood-mages demanded
sacrifices to appease the dragons. That their binding of the monsters required blood and plenty
of it. A hundred slaughtered each and every week. I found that number in some story or other.
And now you do it with potions. No blood at all?'
'Become an alchemist and find out,' snapped Jeiros. 'We keep the dragons in check. That is
what we do and all you need to know. Above all else. Above everything else. Do your stories
tell you how Narammed came to be the first speaker?'
'They agree rather better on that.'
'The nine realms were falling to war. We chose Narammed. Us. The alchemists. We put
ourselves behind him and we pushed him to power. He was wise enough to understand what
we were doing and why. The speaker keeps the kings and queens of the nine realms in check
so that we alchemists can do what we must without impediment. That is the purpose of the
speaker. They are arbiters, that's all. Most who have come since have not understood
it and none save Narammed himself would acknowledge it, but we do not serve the speaker.
The speaker serves us.'
Vale chuckled. 'I don't think SO, Grand Master, but you could try that on at the next council
and see how far you get.'
'The speaker serves the realms, Vale. So do I. So do you. We all have the same master. You
know. strictly, according to all the laws of the Order, we serve Aruch. Both of US.'
Vale was quiet for a moment. When he spoke, he spoke very softly, almost whispered. 'Some
of what you say I grant is true. The first Adamantine Men gave themselves to Narammed
because they understood his cause. He had forsaken his dragons and the power that came with
them so that he could mediate the disputes of other kings. The story that everyone thinks they
know is that Narammed slew a dragon with his bare hands.' He cocked his head and gave
Jeiros a glance, begging to be contradicted.
'With the Adamantine Spear, Night Watchman. That's the legend. Except it's not true.'
'No.' Vale smiled and shifted on his haunches. 'Because it wasn't Narammed; it was some
other warrior. The nameless hero. All these other warlords we call kings and queens were
nothing more than thugs, brutal ones at that. Even those who were clever enough to
understand Narammed's wisdom wouldn't have wanted it. So we showed them his strength
instead. Us. The Adamantine Men. Even we don't know the name of the man who slew the
dragon, but we revere him. He was the greatest hero of all. He gave the power of his name
and his deeds to Narammed. We showed them that we could kill their dragons and that is why
they bent their knees to Narammed. We went from one eyrie to the next carrying his message.

The dragon-slayer.' Vale rocked back on his heels. He wasn't looking at Jeiros any more, but
somewhere distant, off into the past.
'Don't get all misty-eyed on me, Night Watchman.' Jeiros took a deep breath and paused. The
Adamantine Men almost worshipped their story. The Order had a different story, one with a
lot more dragon poison in it, but with much the same outcome in the end. He'd been thinking
of sharing it with the Night Watchman, but the look in Vale's eyes changed his mind. He
settled for something else instead. 'It's a fine legend you have. But think. Your Stories
speak of lone men with swords and axes slaying dragons. How possible is that? One man on
his own cannot kill a grown dragon. Even the best of your soldiers could never, ever do that.
Not by the strength of his arm. He must have been quite a clever fellow, don't you think?'
'It was a unique feat. One never to be repeated.' Vale snapped back to the present. 'What is
your point, Grand Master? I would happily make a habit of talking history with you, but I
suspect you have a point you wish to make. The trouble with you lot is that you're so used to
coming at things askance that you've forgotten how to ask a direct question.'
'I am leading you to a certain way of thinking.'
'Then let me spare you the embarrassment of being any more ham-fisted about it than you
already have. I will agree with you, within these four walls and never beyond them, that
Speaker Zafir leaves a great deal to be desired. Nevertheless, were any man to come to my
room late at night and intimate that I should enter into some sort of conspiracy with regard to
ridding ourselves of her, I should be obliged to inform her, and she would doubtless have
them killed or something equally unpleasant. I serve the speaker, Grand Master. Orders. The
Guard obeys orders. From birth to death. Nothing more, nothing less.' He smiled, and there
wasn't anything friendly about it this time. 'That's our creed.'
Jeiros sat very still and quiet for a few seconds. Then he took a deep breath and let it out very
slowly. 'But whose orders, Night Watchman?'
'The speaker's orders, Grand Master.'
That's me told then. He didn't get up though. 'I know how Adamantine Men are made. Do you
know how to make an alchemist?'
Vale sighed and his face hardened. Jeiros had outstayed his welcome now, that much was
clear. 'Every year I watch as thousands of the desperate and the poor come to the City of
Dragons to try and sell their children to the Order. I know that some of the ones who don't get
taken are left on our doorstep. I know there are men who will, for a fee, take a child from its
parents and bring it here. I know that a few such men are even honest. I also know that a good
lew are not. I know that the Taiytakei slavers profit handsomely.' He smirked. 'What do you
want me to say, alchemist?'
'That there are secrets no one else should know, Night Watchman. Not even a speaker. Not
even you.'
'I don't like secrets, Jeiros. The blood-mages built their power on secrets. You alchemists
broke them by breaking their secrets first, but you have forgotten that and now you follow the
same path. So now I am left to wonder, what can you know that the speaker should not?'
Jeiros stood up. 'I should go. But I can think of two things. The first is that we alchemists are
not so far removed from the blood-magi we overthrew as to leave any of you comfortable, if
you knew the truth of it. The second is a secret that you know too, if only you'd cast your
mind back to think of it. I know what Narammed said when he gave you your name, Night
Watchman. Do you remember?' When night comes it falls to the Adamantine Men to keep
watch over the nine realms. No need to spell it out though. Vale would know the words inside
and out. 'How dark does it have to be, Vale?'
'Let me ask you this, master alchemist. If there is to be a war, can you not stop it? Can you not
simply take away their dragons? How many cities will burn before you do that? If our land is

burned by dragons who happen to have riders on their backs, why is that so different from
dragons that do not. If it all burns anyway, what exactly was the point of you being here?'
Jeiros' voice dropped to a dry whisper. 'When the dragons have riders, there is at least still
some hope,' he breathed. 'That is the point.' The words sounded hollow though.
Vale hadn't moved as Jeiros went to the door; now the Night Watchman had his back to the
alchemist. Vale didn't move. 'Well then,' he said very softly. 'Here's your answer. Pitch black,
master alchemist. It has to be pitch black.'
Jeiros let himself out. He didn't bother trying to hide himself on the way back. All things
considered, it seemed rather futile.

16

The Speaker Zafir
She was at her best when she was angry, and the more her fury waxed the more magnificent
she became. Jehal watched her in silent admiration. He was thoroughly enjoying himself.
Today's entertainment was watching acting Grand Master of the Order of the Scales Jeiros
being metaphorically flayed alive. Yesterday it had been Tassan. The Night Watchman, it
seemed, was now a routine victim of the speaker's ire. And so he should be. I would have him
hanging from a gibbet. Ten thousand invincible warriors guard the palace, and look at the
state of it! You should have taken your own life and spared everyone the embarrassment of
looking at you.
'Unacceptable!' Zafir was already on her feet, but now she picked up the empty wine goblet
from the arm of her throne and hurled it at the grand master. It was a good throw, and would
have hit Jeiros squarely in the face if he hadn't ducked. It clanged across the floor behind him
and lay still. None of the servants who usually rushed to clear away errant goblets and the like
moved a muscle.
There was a moment of silence. Jeiros was red-faced and trembling, although out of fear or
fury was hard to tell. Probably a rather delicious mixture of both, since Zafir's temper was
both fierce and unpredictable. Jehal kept his face stern, but inside he was beaming. Goblet
throwing, the sport of kings. How I've missed this ... Both Jeiros and the speaker looked like
they'd had plenty of practice at this sort of thing while he was away. They might even have
rehearsed it.
The silence continued. He could feel the tension between the speaker and her grand master
rising and rising, until even the air between them seemed to be trying to get out of the way.
With a sigh, he stood up. As soon as he did, he could feel the wave of relief through the hall.
Thank the ancestors for Prince Jehal. He'd been doing a lot of this lately, almost from the
moment he'd landed in
the wreckage of the Adamantine Eyrie. The Red Riders' attack had been no more than a
scratch, superficial and quickly healed, but the wound to Zafir's pride had been savage.
See what happens when you don't listen to me? But that doesn't help either. Although Yd
rather enjoy saying it. He bowed to Speaker Zafir. 'Your Holiness.' It took her longer than
usual to give him a grudging nod and sit back down on her throne. She folded her arms
angrily. Jehal set his eyes on the grand master. Jeiros was looking at him with a mixture of
pleading and defiance.
'The council of kings recognises Prince Jehal!' boomed the court herald. Jehal winced. Calling
this farce a council of kings was absurd, but that was Zafir for you. Calling it that had at least
forced King Sirion out of his tower and into the chamber.

'Grand Master Jeiros.' Jehal favoured him with a smile. 'Let us be reasonable. No one holds
the Order responsible for the Red Riders, whoever they are ...'
'I should hope not! They've burned—'
'Several of the Order. I know. We all know.' Jehal let his smile slip. 'Please don't interrupt me
while I'm speaking. It does nothing for my disposition. If you do it again, I shall simply leave
you to resolve your dispute with the speaker on your own. Doubtless you've always wanted to
make a close inspection of the dungeons under the Glass Cathedral.'
Jeiros went from being red in the face to purple. 'How dare you threaten me, Prince. Only a
council of kings can—'
He didn't get to finish before Zafir was on her feet again. 'This is a council of kings, you old
fool,' she shouted. Jehal could see her hand looking for something else to throw. A knife,
perhaps?
Jeiros took a step forward. 'Then where are the kings?' he shouted back.
Zafir came down from her throne, step by step towards him. 'Would you have me drag Queen
Shezira and King Valgar out of their prisons? Prince Tichane is here for King Valmeyan.
King Tyan is dead and Prince Jehal is not yet crowned. King Silvallan hasn't yet deigned to
answer my summons, and King Narghon is content to let us resolve this matter without his
advice. What would you have me do?'
Jeiros snorted. 'Prisoners and princes. I say again, where are the kings? Where are the
queens?'
'King Sirion is here,' thundered Zafir, ' and I am a queen!'
There was another moment of silence. Jehal broke it, clapping his hands slowly. Before either
of you do anything irrevocably stupid.
'Bravo, Grand Master, bravo. A cheap point bravely won. Yes, Speaker Zafir has still yet to
appoint an heir to h'er own throne and pass on her crown.' He shot Zafir a glance that told her
to keep quiet. He could hardly count on her doing what he asked these days, but on this
occasion she did. 'I applaud your courage.'
Grand Master Jeiros took a step forward. 'Until she does—'
'But not your wisdom!' barked Jehal. 'Where do the Red Riders strike? South of the Purple
Spur. In Queen Zafir's lands, in the speaker's lands, in the border between them. It is a well
known principle of war, written in the first chapter of Prince Lai's Principles, that an effective
campaign requires a single absolute leader. Speaker Zafir is wise to keep her crown until these
renegades have been crushed. I'm sure, as soon as that has been done, she will be delighted to
name her heir.' He shot Zafir another glance. And you better had.
'Prince Jehal—' Jeiros began.
'The Red Riders fly on the backs of dragons, Grand Master. What would happen if those
dragons did not receive your potions, Grand Master?'
Jeiros rolled his eyes. 'As we all very well know, they would become wild. They would turn
on their own riders.' Which was barely scratching the surface of the truth, but was as much as
the grand master or any other alchemist would admit to, except perhaps to a council of kings
that actually had some kings in it.
'Since that has clearly not happened, one must assume that they are receiving your potions,
Grand Master. Who makes these potions?'
'The Order of course.'
'Anyone else? Perhaps you would care to speculate, Grand Master? Who is supplying your
potions to these outlaws?'
The alchemist snorted and his lip curled. 'I cannot begin to imagine. They have stolen a
goodly quantity from the speaker's eyries. As for the rest, ask amongst yourselves. Ask the
kings and queens

of your illustrious council.' He sounded a little uncertain; he was quite clever enough to see
where Jehal was going with this.
'They are your potions, Grand Master, and I am asking you. We will most certainly enquire of
the kings and queens of the realms, but is it not possible that these riders have friends within
your Order? For all their treason, they are doubtless powerful men, with powerful families.'
Not that their families will know what they're doing, since the penalty for this will most
certainly run deep into all their bloodlines.
'Preposterous.'
'Really?' Jehal raised an eyebrow. 'You don't sound entirely sure.'
'The Order would never ...' Jehal could see the grand master thinking. Thinking that he was
almost certainly right. That there was almost certainly no treachery from within the Order
itself. That he had almost nothing to fear. And then too he was thinking about the
consequences, if one of those almosts turned out to be wrong. Catastrophic for him at least,
with no almost about it. And he was thinking about Jehal, and of what he knew about the
prince that Hyram had called the Viper, who twisted and turned and knew secrets about
people that they didn't even know themselves. Jehal let him stew for a second or two, before
putting on his most reasonable voice.
'All the council of kings is asking, Grand Master, is that you audit your potion supplies.'
'Counting, Grand Master,' muttered Zafir acidly.
Jeiros stamped a foot. 'Do you think we are not already doing that? I have spent months,
months, merely trying to count all the dragons in the realms to determine whether Queen
Shezira's renegade,' he glared at Jehal, 'is dead or alive. Do you have any conception of how
difficult it is to count even dragons? And yet you ask me to count potions? And frankly, as
this council should be very aware, nearly all of my alchemists are fully occupied making
them.'
Jehal smiled. 'The Red Riders are not some local insurrection, Grand Master. They are
attacking the speaker; they are attacking everything she stands for, and by inference
everything that you stand for. All I am asking, Grand Master, is that yon tell us who
is requesting more of your potions than usual. Because you must know that. If you didn't, you
would not be doing your duty, and I know that cannot be the case. When you gives this
answer, we shall know where they are getting their supplies.' As if we didn't know already.
'They are stealing them from the speaker's eyries!'
'All of them, Grand Master? Then you can show us by what records you know this.'
Jeiros stood there for a second, quivering. Then he bowed his head. 'It shall be done.'
'And soon, Grand Master,' snapped Zafir. 'Very soon.'
The council moved on to other things: to the repairs to the eyries, to preparations to receive
the remaining kings and queens of the realms, to the impending trial. Jehal watched behind
half-closed eyes. In particular he watched King Sirion, who looked as comfortable as a man
sitting on a hill full of stinging ants. She's got to you, hasn't she? Whatever she offered you, it
must have been good. So which way will you jump, when someone comes to kick you off
your fence? Most probably King Sirion was thinking the same thing about him. Except that I
don't look like a man riven by indecision. Or do I?
The council slowly dispersed. Sirion hurried away back to his tower. Usually Zafir did the
same, spurning Jehal's company, but today she lingered. Jehal counted the glances that turned
to watch her. Tyrin, her cousin Sakabian, even Prince Tichane. I was hardly even away, and
they're all sniffing after her like she's a bitch in heat.
'Walk with me,' she said and offered him her arm. She led him outside into the open air.
Scorpions and Adamantine Guardsmen packed the palace walls and towers, and a dozen
dragons circled overhead on permanent overwatch. Most of the damage from the Red Riders'
attack had been cleared away but the Speaker's Tower still bore the scars; the lower floors,

including the Chamber of Audience, were still being gutted. Zafir had drafted in almost every
craftsman from the City of Dragons in an attempt to repair it in time for the trial.
'No more hirelings, eh? I warned you that these Red Riders might grow into something you
couldn't control,' said Jehal.
'They're no great threat now. They made a terrible noise and a mess, but they have become
rash. This must have cost them a third
of their number and I have all my dragons back and more. But it's true that they've made me
look foolish in front of the council. I've had enough of them. I want them gone.' She turned to
look at him. 'And on the subject of my council, I don't recall inviting you, Prince Jehal. I seem
to remember inviting kings and queens.' 'You sound like Jeiros.'
'And you should have stayed at home, playing with your starling. How is she? Still showing
off her pretty plumage?' 'Not as pretty as yours, Zafir.'
She slipped him an arch look. 'Oh, is that why you came back?' 'Of course. Why else?'
'Then I can't help but wonder why you left in the first place. Although I did hear a rumour that
someone died.'
'I might have mentioned it, yes. I seem to have become a king since last we met.'
Zafir laughed, a pretty tinkle of breaking crystal. 'You're not a king until I say you are.'
Jehal pointed over to the Glass Cathedral. 'Then say I am.'
She smiled. 'I thought you'd return. I was expecting to hear that someone had died too. In fact
I had a quite particular expectation in that regard. I am sad and disappointed to learn of your
father's passing. Very sadly disappointed. Were there any witnesses? Should I put you on trial
as well? Or were you extremely careful?'
Sometimes, Jehal thought, life would be much simpler if he gave in to the urge to wrap his
hands around her delicate little throat and squeeze until she shut up. 'King Tyan passed away
peacefully, I think you will find. Now Furymouth requires a king, and thus I require a crown.'
'After the council, Jehal. Not before.'
Jehal pursed his lips. He nodded slowly. 'You're going to call for Shezira's head then.'
'And you're going to try to stop me from getting it.'
'Why yes, Your Holiness. Having no particular desire to see the realms ripped to pieces by
war, I do think I might. Since I will doubtless succeed, you might be inclined to show some of
that magnanimity I was mentioning and avoid making a fool of yourself in front of your kings
and queens. Of all people, I should be your ally, Zafir. Furymouth and the Pinnacles have
always stood side by side.
Even in the War of Thorns, there were as many knights from the Harvest Realm who fought
with Vishmir as fought against him. Besides, what are all these northerners except bloodmage spawn.'
Zafir pursed her lips. 'History, Jehal? Here is some history for you. The Pinnacles are the
heart of the realms. The Silver King came to us there. He tamed the dragons there. The bloodmages ruled from there. The Order of the Scales ruled from there. Even after Narammed built
the Adamantine Palace and the City of Dragons, we were the heart of everything. For most of
those centuries, Furymouth was mud and huts.'
Jehal shrugged. 'And yet look at us now. You keep your history and I'll keep my wealth. We
both have plenty enough dragons though.'
She sniffed. 'You want me to let Shezira go?' 'Yes.'
'Let suspicion hang over her? Leave the world to wonder? Did Hyram fall or was he pushed?'
'I see you remember.' 'My answer is no.'
Jehal grinned and bared his teeth. 'Then I look forward to humbling you at your council.'
'You will not be there, Prince.' 'Nevertheless.'
Zafir stopped. She turned to face him, looking up with wide earnest eyes. 'Are you going to be
my enemy now, Jehal?'

Jehal put the palm of one hand against the side of her neck, the age-old gesture of
brotherhood. 'I am your best and truest friend, my lover. You will know your enemies at your
council, for they will be the ones who shout and bellow their support when you call on them
to hang Queen Shezira.'
She took a step away, withdrawing from his hand, and slowly shook her head. 'No. My
enemies will be the ones who oppose my will. And I will not forgive, Prince Jehal. Whoever
they turn out to be.'

17

Unwanted Attention
Vale Tassan watched as the last scorpion was hoisted into place. The Adamantine Palace
bristled with them now. He sighed the long satisfied sigh of someone who'd got exactly what
he wanted. The Red Riders were enemies of the realms and now at last the speaker had set her
mind to crushing them. Dragons were moving up from the eyries in the south and combing the
Purple Spur. The Adamantine Men had been unleashed from their barracks. Some had been
dispatched to join the dragon-riders in their search, but the large part remained to guard the
City of Dragons and the speaker's palace. He'd got all the weapons he'd asked for. No dragon
would get close enough to burn the Speaker's Tower for a second time. If they did, that would
mean his head.
Seventy-four days since Head Priest Aruch had handed Zafir the Adamantine Spear. Seventyfour days gone in a flash. The last Night Watchman to go to war had served mad old Anzuine
in the War of Thorns and died fighting Vishmir's dragons. Dying didn't bother Vale though.
What bothered him was that three dragons had flown straight through his defences, meagre as
they were, and burned the speaker's palace. He couldn't blame that on Zafir, not all of it.
There had been fifty scorpions on the walls when the Red Riders had come. Now fifty
Adamantine Men had been executed and fed to the speaker's dragons. One for each crew that
had missed. Good men all. How could they all have failed? How could we have been so lax
when it is our duty to be vigilant?
Not being ready. That was what kept Vale awake at nights.
'Satisfied with your handiwork?' asked a voice behind him.
'Prince Jehal.' Vale turned around, dropped to his knees and bowed. 'Yes, Your Highness.
Most satisfied.' He kept his head down, eyes to the ground. The Adamantine Men, even their
Unwanted Attention
commanders, were mere servants after all. Servants to the dragon kings and queens, princes
and lords. Sometimes being lowly and small could have its advantages.
'You can get up, you know. I'm not Zafir.'
'As you command, Your Highness.' He rose slowly, his eyes fixed on Jehal's feet. What does
he want? Nothing good. Nothing good ever came from the Viper.
'Tell me, Night Watchman, what did you think of the council this morning?'
Vale slowly shook his head. 'I have no opinion to offer, Your Highness. I exist only to serve.'
'You might try that on Zafir and get away with it, but not with me. Speaker Hyram, unless I
am misinformed, once valued your advice.'
Vale stayed silent. Silence was always the safest defence. Words only made trouble.
Especially with this one. 'Well? Did he or did he not?'
Vale shrugged. 'I cannot say, Your Highness. Only our late lord may say as to the value he
found in what few words I had to offer. And he is dead.' Dead because of me. My fault.

'So he is. You served him for a long time. Why do you suppose he turned his back on
Shezira?'
'Again I have no opinion to offer, Your Highness.' Because of you. You and your potions and
your stepfather. Because of Zafir and because, in the end, he was weak like all men are weak
when they grow old. He will not be making such a mistake again. He frowned. He would have
to watch those thoughts lest they turned from thoughts into words and then to actions, and
before you knew where you were, it would be him throwing people off balconies. He knew
exactly where he'd start too. He bit his tongue.
Jehal's smile was bland and false. 'He was a good speaker, I think, until the end. He wanted
too much to live, perhaps? Is that how Speaker Zafir turned him? Was she just too pretty to
refuse, do you think?'
'You might be a better judge of that than I, Your Highness.' Inside, Vale winced at his own
words. Silence! Remember, silence is your defence.
Jehal's eyes glittered. 'Really?'
'Love of women and a long life are two things that we of the Guard have long forsaken.'
Jehal laughed. 'Oh, then I could never be an Adamantine Man. Although you do confuse me.
There are whorehouses around your barracks, and I can tell you from exhaustive personal
endeavour that some of them are really quite good.'
'Love of women, Prince Jehal. We have forsaken love, not lust. We are swords. We sate
ourselves in flesh as the need comes upon us and then we move on.'
'Cold words, Night Watchman!'
'Forgive me, Your Highness.' Vale bowed. 'They are not my words, nor those of any
Guardsman before me. That is how Prince Lai described us.'
'In Principles} I don't think so. I would have remembered that.'
'Prince Lai wrote other works, less well read or well received, Your Highness. I have a small
library of my own.' There, now why did you say that, Vale? That sounded like a boast, and
Adamantine Men have no need to boast.
Jehal cocked his head. 'You are a fascinating fellow. Especially for someone who has no
opinions of his own. I've always admired Principles. We used to have all his other works in
our own library and then we had a fire. I didn't know any copies had survived.'
'The monastery in Sand has the most complete collection, Your Highness. I have but a few,
but I would be honoured to offer them to you.' There. Is that enough? Will you go away and
leave me alone now?
'I will take you up on that, Night Watchman, but not as a gift. I couldn't take such treasures
from anyone, least of all a man who has forsaken love. War is all you have left.'
Jehal turned away but Vale didn't allow himself to relax. Hyram called him Viper because
poison came out of his mouth, but there's some scorpion sting in him as well, I think.
Sure enough, Jehal took one step and then stopped. 'Night Watchman, may I ask you a
question on which your opinion is most certainly relevant. How many dragons do you think
your scorpions and your legions can stop? More than three, I hope.'
I will not rise to that. 'I cannot stop the dragons. Your Highness. Only their riders.'
'Then how many riders, Night Watchman?'
'The answer to that is in Principles, Your Highness, as I'm sure you know. A legion may face
ten mounted dragons at best before it breaks. I have twenty legions. In the field, therefore, two
hundred riders at best. Here, behind these walls and towers, maybe twice that number.'
'Are you sure?'
'No one can be sure of such a thing, Your Highness. No one has ever tried.'
'It would be a slaughter.'
'The palace and the city would burn and most of us would die. Perhaps all. But that's what we
are for.'

Jehal laughed, although he didn't seem to find anything funny. 'Then get yourself ready, Night
Watchman, for when Zafir puts Shezira to the sword, the north will come to war with you.
The flower of their manhood will be pierced by your bolts, while these walls and towers are
smashed and burned and your legions with them. There will be nothing left of any of you.
Everything Hyram preserved will go up in flames. If the realms survive at all, he will be
remembered as the Great Fool.'
Vale bowed his head. 'If the speaker commands us to fall on our spears, that is what we will
do.' One might ask where you will be, Prince, when this war comes. Here with us, defending
the heart that holds the nine realms together? Or will you watch from a distance and pick off
the survivors? Shall we see if I can guess?
'You do that, Night Watchman. You do that.' Jehal still had a smirk on his face as he turned
away again. Vale kept very still, holding back the urge to wipe the smirk away with his fist.
At least Jehal didn't turn back a second time.
He put the Viper out of his mind and immersed himself in inspecting the defences. His
soldiers had placed over three hundred scorpions on the walls in less than three days and all of
them needed to be perfect — he would accept nothing less. He watched as horsemen raced
around the palace flying target kites from their saddles. By the end of the day, every scorpion
had been fired. Each and every one of them worked. He knew which crews had hit their target
with the first shot, which ones had hit it with their second, and which ones had failed and
would have to be replaced. They
would practise every day now until the council of kings and queens was done and the lords of
the realms had dispersed back to their own lands. Long after dark he sat awake in his little
room, burning lanterns, poring over rotas and lists, staring at his maps, shuffling crews
around, placing his best at the points of the palace most likely to be attacked. Being certain
that he was ready.
He was about to admit defeat and accept that some decisions would have to wait until after
he'd had some sleep when his door slowly swung open. He glanced up, half expecting to see
Jeiros come for another try at changing his mind, but no. The Viper again. Instantly, Vale was
on guard.
'I saw the light under your door, so I knew you were still awake.' Jehal pushed past Vale and
sat himself down. With casual rudeness he looked at the maps and starting picking through
them. 'Trying to decide where and when Jaslyn and Almiri will strike?'
Vale clenched his toes. Why are you here and what will it take to make you go away? 'I am
more concerned, Your Highness, that the Red Riders will try to disrupt the council.'
'And condemn their queen to an even more certain death? Why would they do that?'
'They have struck at us once, Your Highness.' The books. That's what he's here for. Prince
Lai's books. A shame to let them go, but needs must as the devil drives. He started to look
among his shelves.
'Yes, they have, haven't they? Last I heard, Rider Hyrkallan was leading them. I wonder what
madness possessed him to burn the palace. He always struck me as a very sensible sort of
fellow. Pity about his sense of humour. I wonder sometimes if they do something to their
children in the north. Do they cut out some part to make them like that? Queen Shezira was as
bad and as for her daughters ...' He smiled and shook his head. 'Don't get me started on her
daughters.'
Vale pulled three old books down.'I hear rumour that Hyrkallan abandoned the Red Riders
some weeks ago and that he has been seen in the north. I am inclined to believe this is true.
Their actions made sense to me when Hyrkallan led them. Now I don't understand them at all.
They are destroying themselves. They will not last long.'
'An enemy is at his most dangerous when you don't understand
his reasons.' Jehal smiled. 'Principles, Night Watchman. Perhaps it is a trick.'

Vale shrugged. 'Here, Your Highness.' He put the three books on the table. 'I will wager you
these that when the Red Riders fall you will not find Rider Hyrkallan among them. These are
what you came for, are they not?'
Jehal gave him a lazy look. 'No, Night Watchman, no they are not.'
They stared at each other. Vale said nothing. Silence, remember.
For a long time they both watched each other in silence. Finally Jehal spoke: 'Do I have to
spell it out for you in simple words?'
'Forgive me, Your Highness, but I am a soldier. We are men of direct action, not guile. We do
not deal well with innuendo and insinuation. If not the books, I have no idea what you want
from me, Your Highness. Yes, simple words would be best.'
Jehal frowned as if confused. 'Hyram hated me and I had no love for him. I wonder why it
should trouble me to see everything fall to ruin.' He sighed and shook his head. 'Are you
really so stupid, Night Watchman? No, I don't think you are.'
Vale stood very still. He didn't speak, only waited. The Viper would either go away now or
he'd say what he wanted. Then he would go away.
Jehal clucked his tongue. 'In fact, I'd say you are one of the more astute minds on the
Speaker's Council, Night Watchman, although I will accept that is somewhat of a barbed
compliment. Very well.' He frowned again. 'I am here to ask you for your help.'
'I exist to serve, Your Highness.'
'And therein lies the problem, Night Watchman, because the help I want from you is a small
matter of not serving, and it will cost you your head if you are discovered.'
Silent and still. Let him speak and say nothing.
'So. If the council of kings and queens takes Queen Shezira's head, there will be a war. The
Red Riders are only a start. Would you agree?'
Vale said nothing. He kept his face blank and still, with the pleasing result that a twitch of
irritation flashed around Jehal's lips.
'Simple words. Yes, yes, very well. Shezira has three daughters.
Queen Almiri now sits on the throne of Evenspire and is certainly helping the Red Riders.
Zafir will have proof of that soon enough. Soon-to-be-Queen Jaslyn sits on Shezira's throne
and she is betrothed to the fool son of King Sirion. Two queens and one king. Three realms
and many dragons, and they are already furious with Zafir. And with me, for that matter, but I
doubt that is of any consequence here.'
There was that flicker of annoyance again. Or was it something else? Was it... ? Vale felt an
unexpected thrill blossom inside him. Jehal was nervous. He might even be scared.
Jehal tapped his foot irritably. 'You know all of this. If killing Shezira isn't enough to send the
north to war against her then Zafir will demand Almiri's head next. Do you think Almiri's own
sisters will abandon her?' He shook his head. 'Queen Shezira sitting on her rightful throne
would stop that from happening. She would not allow a war to tear the realms apart, no matter
how she'd been wronged. The rest of them ...' He shrugged. 'Who knows, eh? So here's a
choice for you, Night Watchman. You can sit idly by while the speaker wrecks everything
you're sworn to defend. Or you can do something about it.'
The inside of Vale's mouth had gone very dry. He felt lightheaded. Jeiros I could understand,
but you? What makes you think I would even countenance such a thing when you are surely
thinking of nothing but yourself? And yet I find I am still listening. Why? Why am I not
calling my own men to arrest this traitor?
He shook the questions away. 'And exactly what, Prince Jehal, do you suggest I do?' There.
Even for asking that question I should have myself hanged.
Jehal wrinkled his nose. 'All I require of you is that you do what the Adamantine Men always
do.' He bared his teeth. 'Be vigilant. Don't lose another speaker, Night Watchman. Watch her
and watch her well. Perhaps to the exclusion of others.' His grimace finally managed to turn

into a grin. 'I think you are quite clever enough to understand me.' He held up his hands as if
to cut off Vale's reply. A wasted gesture, since there was none forthcoming. 'Oh, and don't get
too excited, Night Watchman. Whatever happens, you can be sure I'll be nowhere near to be
touched by it. The worst you can do is kill a few men who want nothing more than
for the realms to be at peace.' He nodded curtly and swept back out of the door. Vale stood
very still and watched him go.
There goes a prince, he thought with a certain amused wonder, who things he is far cleverer
than he actually is.
He let Jehal's words roll around his head for a few seconds until he knew what he was going
to do with them. Then he set to correcting the disarray inflicted upon his maps.

18

The King of Crags
One by one they arrived. Six of the Syuss on the back of a pair of jet-black hunting dragons.
King Narghon and twenty of his riders. King Silvallan and six of his Golden Guardsmen.
Rumours raced back and forth through the palace that Princess Jaslyn had left her eyries in the
far north and was coming with a hundred dragons. On the next day she was coming with two
hundred, then three; then she was coming alone and in disguise. The speaker's eyries around
the palace were overflowing with Jehal's dragons and Sirion's and those of the other kings, but
mostly with Zafir's. Many of her riders were here now and nearly all of her adult dragons, all
scouring the Purple Spur. There were always at least a dozen dragons in the skies above the
Adamantine Palace, watching in case Hyrkallan's traitors crawled out of their caves once
again. From his perch up on the Gatehouse Jehal watched them all come and go. He spent
more and more of his time up there, looking down over the eyries. He was waiting for the
Night Watchman. Putting himself in Vale's way. Looking for an answer.
An answer I'm not going to get. He was there again on the evening before the council that
would decide the future of the realms. He looked down along the palace walls, thick with
scorpions. If I was Vale, I would stay silent. I'd leave me to get on with it and then make my
decision as it suited me.
He sighed. It didn't really matter which way the Night Watchman jumped. Well, unless you
were worried about the small matter of the thousands and thousands of people who would
burn in a dragon-war, and the tens of thousands who'd probably starve afterwards. But as long
as it stayed in the north, nothing that particularly mattered would get damaged. The easy
route, of course, was to make sure the council made the right decision in the first place.
Narghon would do as he was told: specifically he would
The King of the Crags
do as Queen Fyon told him, and now that Tyan was dead, Fyon was left as the eldest of
Jehal's family. Silvallan wasn't stupid and had nothing to gain from taking Shezira's head.
Sirion though ... which way will you jump? I can see Zafir's touched you, but I can't see how.
What did she offer? And how easily are you taken in? He'd spent a lot of his time on Siron,
making sure that little whispers reached him. The right little whispers. He was the key, but all
he had to do was stay silent. Inaction would suffice. Should I just tell you that your cousin
wasn't pushed, that he simply fell? I could tell you how it all went. I could tell you that I
pushed him right up to the edge, until he was teetering on the brink, but that the last step was
his own. I could tell you that I saw him. I could even show you how. Is there a punishment for

any of that? I suppose when you consider everything else, there probably would be. What
with all the poisoning and so forth.
That, in many ways, would be the best thing for the realms. To stand up in front of the council
and tell them exactly how he'd driven Hyram mad. Tell them everything he'd done. Leaving
Zafir carefully out of it. Shezira would be spared. The north would be appeased. Zafir would
be blameless, her position secure. At the very worst they'd exile him. He'd be forced to spend
his time in Furymouth with his queen. Wasn't that what he wanted anyway?
No. That's only half of what I want and so it's not going to happen.
Jehal watched the Night Watchman pacing his walls, and knew that he wouldn't get an
answer. Finally he retired to his bed in the Speaker's Tower. Hyram's bed, not many months
ago. When he slept there though, Hyram's ghost couldn't be bothered to haunt him. Instead he
always dreamed of home. Of years long ago when King Tyan had been strong and well. Of
Lystra in his arms. Of the Taiytakei and their strange and magnificent gifts. Of the last thing
he'd done before he'd left Furymouth. Night after night he saw himself poised over his father's
bed, the pillow in his hands, watching the last light in his father's eyes finally die.
Except tonight his father wasn't his father but Lystra, and the pillow wasn't a pillow but a
knife, and the bed was covered in blood, and her mouth and eyes were wide with terror and
she spasmed and writhed, and however much his heart filled with horror at what he'd done, he
couldn't leave her like that, and he would lift the knife to finish her,
blinded by his own weeping, except that no matter how hard he tried, she wouldn't die, and
the screaming only got louder ...
The nightmare woke him up. He lay in the darkness of his room, staring at the ceiling above
his bed, listening to Kazah, his pot-boy, snoring. His heart slowly stopped its pounding.
Outside, the palace was quiet.
He got up and walked to his windows, opened them and stepped through to the balcony
outside. Hyram's rooms, Hyram's balcony, where Hyram and Shezira had stood that fateful
night. Hyram had had three different poisons in him by then. He shouldn't have been able to
move and yet he'd dragged himself outside. Where Shezira had found him, rambling and not
making any sense.
Jehal stood where Hyram had stood. He peered down. He'd watched it all unfold through the
eyes of the little mechanical dragon, his wedding gift from the Taiytakei. Shezira had never
touched the former speaker. He could say that, if he wanted to. But then he'd have to admit
that Hyram only fell because he'd flown the Taiytakei dragon straight at Hyram's face. He'd
thought he was being so damn clever, but all he'd done was make a mess of a perfect plan.
Zafir had married Hyram. Hyram had made her speaker. All the hard work was done. Hyram
would have lost his mind over the months that followed. No one would have been surprised
when he fell off his own balcony once he couldn't even wipe his own arse any more. Lystra
would die in childbirth. He and Zafir would rule the realms together for two decades. Longer,
if they could find a way. Their enemies might have their suspicions, but suspicions were all
they could ever be.
Down below the stones were dark. Too dark to see if Hyram's blood still stained them. It
could still have been perfect. But Shezira was there when Hyram fell, and now Zafir was
intent on casting what might have been a tragic accident as a murder. Because, if Shezira is
gone, I really have no reason left not to slit Lystra's throat. We both know that I have to
choose and choose soon. Ah, Zafir, impatience will always be your undoing. So now I have to
decide what I want. Do I want you? Do I want Lystra? Do I want your throne?
He sighed. Shezira wasn't going to die. Sirion would dither and abstain. Narghon and
Silvallan would call lor her to live. Zalu
would stand alone and lose. And she would blame him. Now was no time to be uncertain.
Before the council and whatever consequences it brought, he would have to decide between

his lover and his queen, otherwise it would all go on and on and on, and before you knew
where you were, he'd have to avert another dragon-war. No, one of them would have to die,
and soon. No room for kindness, no room for mercy.
He wandered back inside. There was another hour before dawn but the air was still and
stiflingly hot and the nightmares had destroyed any possibility of sleep. He kicked Kazah
awake.
Bring me light! he snapped in brusque gestures. Words were lost on Kazah, who was as deaf
as a wall. They spoke in signs, in a bastard language of their own devising. Kazah hurried
away and was soon back with a candle.
Clothes! Jehal took the candle to a table by the balcony and rooted around until he found a
quill and some ink and some writing paper. Behind him, Kazah was holding a tunic and
trousers. Jehal dressed himself. Then he sent Kazah away. He sat down and stared at the
empty page in front of him.
Lord Meteroa,
My previous instructions regarding Princess Lystra are withdrawn. Jehal
He looked in horror at the words he'd written. So simple, so pure, so innocent in their way, yet
they would tell Meteroa everything he needed to know. Anything more would be superfluous.
The eyrie-master would understand exactly what was required of him.
He shook his head. I can't send this. The words may hide their meaning from others, but I'll
always know what I've done. I'm commanding Lystra's murder.
The words sat on the page as words were wont to do. Still, un-moving, accusing. He bit his
lip. And that's exactly what I have to do. She's in the way and she has to go. That was always
how it was going to be, and if you weren't prepared for it, you should never have married her
in the first place. You could have turned her down when the white dragon you were promised
was never given. Face it, you were just being
greedy. Just being you, who can never say no when it's served up on a plate for you. Well
you've had her every which way you know and so now you can move on. Let her go. Marry
Zafir. Follow her as speaker. It's not as if you'll have to wield the knife yourself, not if you
don't want to. Say the word and Meteroa will do it for you. You can be a thousand miles
away, hands as clean as Zafir's silken sheets.
I think I might love her though. There. That was an admission, wasn't it?
Pah! Kings have no room for feelings, remember? Who said that, Jehal? Was it you? Yes, I
rather think it was. Zafir s much better in bed. Take that and be grateful.
Lystra is carrying my heir. My first-born. A son, perhaps. A son who could one day wear my
father's crown. There. Wriggle out of that one.
But was that anything so special ? First-born ? He must have sired at least a dozen bastards by
now. Zafir freely admitted that she might have conceived at least twice because of him and
that both times she'd drunk a dose of Dawn Torpor and bled it out. Was this so different? If
Lystra knew what was at stake, she'd probably even accept her fate. My life to save my
mother? Yes, my love.
Without even thinking about it, he'd dropped a blot of molten wax onto the page. It sat there,
waiting for him, waiting for the press of his ring to turn his words into a royal command and
seal Lystra's fate. The trouble was, his hand wouldn't move.
This is stupid. In a minute the wax is going to go hard and I'm going to have to scrape it off
and start again.
He closed his eyes. He didn't have much time for any of the many possible gods that the
realms had to offer. Most people saved their prayers for their ancestors, but when it came to
that, all Jehal could think about was his father, drooling and useless. And even if dying had
restored Tyan's senses, Jehal wasn't at all sure he ought to be praying to someone he'd
murdered, especially when it came to murdering someone else. Conscience troubling you,

son? You never prayed to anyone about finishing me off, did you? Got a little trouble with
some guilt there? And you thought for some reason that I might want to help you with it?
Still, he couldn't think of anyone more useful to ask for forgiveness.
Somewhere over the palace, in the first light of the breaking dawn, a dragon shrieked. Two
short calls and then a long one; and with the last one it must have swooped straight over the
palace, and low too. The whole tower shook with the thunder of its passing.
Jehal froze and then rushed to the window. No one in their right mind would do that, not now,
not with the Night Watchman's scorpions lining the walls. There were shouts down below, but
they weren't shouts of alarm, and when Jehal swivelled his gaze, he saw that the dragon hadn't
flow across the palace, but had actually landed within the Gateyard walls. Men with torches
were running towards it. A rider was dismounting and he wasn't waiting for a Scales or
anything like that. He was racing straight for the Tower of Air. To Zafir. ,
Jehal left the letter where it was. He pulled on his boots and ran out of his rooms, out of the
Speaker's Tower, and went to find Zafir as well. As he reached the Tower of Air, soldiers
raced past him, heading away. He was halfway up the stairs when a bell began to toll. An
alarm. More dragons. He ran faster and soon found Zafir, hurriedly dressed, coming the other
way.
'Oh, trust you to be the first,' she snapped. She swept past him, not quite running but not quite
walking either. Jehal reversed and fell in behind her.
'The first to what?'
'We're going to war — what does it look like?' 'What? Are we under attack?'
'You're still not a king, Jehal. You have no voice in this, but if you must know, there are
dragons pouring out of the Worldspine. Hundreds of them. Almiri's and Jaslyn's.'
Jehal snorted. 'That can't be right.' No, no, no, they weren't supposed to do that.
'Why not? Slipped in and out of the Worldspine, where no one would see them. They mean to
attack the palace.'
'That can't be right.' Could it? Could they really be so bold? If it was true ...
'Jehal, listen to me carefully while I say it again slowly. Hundreds of dragons are flying out of
the Worldspine. They are coming here. They have gone to war.'
Jehal grinned. 'If they have then I take off my hat to them. Can
we stop them?' They're insane. They can't possibly have enough dragons. Not with so many of
Zafir's already here ... 'Of course I can stop them.'
They were nearly at the bottom of the tower. Jehal's mind raced on. If the Night Watchman
was right then Hyrkallan was probably leading the attack. But that couldn't be, could it?
Hyrkallan was too canny. He'd never let Jaslyn do something like this. It was suicide. 'I know
Hyrkallan. He's one to wait and wait and wait and strike when the time is exactly right. Which
isn't now. He's devoted to Shezira and an attack now would make her death certain. He'd
wait.'
'While Jaslyn is impatient and has little love for her mother. Your point?'
'My point?' Jehal laughed, but before he could say any more, a second messenger threw
himself to the ground in front of them.
'Your Holiness!' he gasped. 'It's not the north. It's the King of the Crags! The King of the
Crags is coming!'

19

Silence
For all practical purposes, Jaslyn was a prisoner. She'd heard the new speaker's summons and
she'd flown south without an inch of doubt inside her. She wasn't sure whether she wanted her
mother freed or hanged, but in many ways that was a question that missed the point. Her
mother would prevail. She would win because she always won, and Jaslyn would be tossed in
her wake like a leaf in a storm.
She'd flown to Southwatch and then to Evenspire and then, quite to her surprise, all her
dragons had been taken away. By her own sister. As jailers went, Almiri was as kind as they
came, but a prison was a prison, and Jaslyn chafed at the invisible chains that held her to the
ground. They might as well have cut off her legs.
'You're mad,' Almiri said when Jaslyn had told her where she was going. 'Speaker Zafir will
throw you in a tower and have your head too.'
'And you're afraid,' was Jaslyn's reply. It hadn't been a good conversation after that. Maybe
Almiri was right and Zafir was a monster. Did it matter? Not to go was to concede defeat,
wasn't it? Jehal, who most certainly was a monster, who surely had his hand up Zafir as far as
it would go, would waggle his fingers and make the speaker issue whatever decrees pleased
him. Not to go meant no one would be there to challenge him, yet here she was, trapped by
her own big sister as if they were both ten years younger and Almiri had been left in charge
for the afternoon so their mother could go hunting. After days of frantic preparation, she
suddenly found herself with nothing to do except to sit with Isentine and watch Almiri's
Scales at their work while her riders kicked their heels in the vastness of the Palace of Paths.
'This is as close as I can get to them,' she sighed. 'My dragons.
Just because she's my big sister, why does she think she can get away with this?'
Isentine had a faraway look in his eyes. 'Your Highness, this is the first time I've been away
from Outwatch in five years. Should I be honest with you?'
'Always. Someone has to be.' They walked together among the buildings of the inner eyrie.
Jaslyn knew they wouldn't be allowed out onto the landing fields, that Almiri's soldiers had
orders to stop her. They were watching her now, a company of them, never too far away.
'I thought, when you asked me to fly with you, that I would never see Outwatch again. I
thought that we would fly to the Adamantine Palace and that we would both die on the
speaker's command. I thought you were foolish and reckless. I thought you should have come
here to see your sister. That you should have come to plan a war together.'
Jaslyn growled: 'If that's what you thought then why didn't you say anything?' Even here
within the outer walls of the Palace of Paths and its eyrie, most of the buildings were guarded.
A few of them carried the sign of the alchemists on the doors. Somewhere not far away was
the hatchery; the guards were unlikely to let her near Almiri's precious eggs though. I might
smash a few in my impatience to be away.
Isentine ignored her. 'That's what Queen Almiri really wants and you know it. You do
yourself no favours spurning her and sulking out here, Your Highness.'
'I'm not her little sister any more, Eyrie-Master. I have almost three times her dragons at my
beck and call.'
'You should listen to Hyrkallan now that he's back ...' Isentine kept on talking, but Jaslyn
suddenly wasn't listening any more. Or rather she wasn't listening to him. She was listening to
someone else. Or something else. A voice, inside her head, so faint she could barely even hear
it, and yet so loud it filled the world.
Who are you?

She froze. Two and a half months had passed since she'd last heard that voice in her head. The
same voice. Except then it had come from a dragon half dead from poison, who'd breathed its
last that same day.
A chill ran through her, down her spine and right to her toes, freezing them to the spot. Her
jaw fell open. Her heart began to race.
'Silence?'
I remember you. A venom came with the thoughts, a snarling anger.
Isentine was looking at her, concern on his face.
We will brea\free of you. One day. One day. I told you that. The thought seemed to fade into
the distance. She could almost feel something being wrenched out of her. Whatever it was,
her heart went with it.
'Where are you? Silence!'
'Your Highness?' Isentine had an unforgivable hand on her shoulder. 'Your Highness!'
She closed her eyes. All she wanted now was to fall to her knees and weep. With a heave and
a shudder, she shook Isentine off and looked around. At least a dozen of Almiri's soldiers and
servants were watching them.
'You forget yourself, old man.' She slapped him. Mother would have taken your hand and cut
it off, even though you were her dearest friend. That's why I'm not ready to be her. I'm not
ready to be anything. All I want is Silence. I want my dragon back. That's all.
Isentine staggered away, bowing as best he could, apologising and yet still asking whether
anything was wrong. Jaslyn didn't know how to answer. The voice in her head had seemed
more real than anything, a pinpoint brilliance of colour in a world of hazy greys. Now she
wasn't sure. Did I imagine it? I can't ask if anyone heard a voice because there was no voice to
be heard. She took a deep breath and clutched at her head.
'Your Highness! Please!'
'I heard a voice, Isentine.' Her face went very hard as she looked at him, willing him to simply
listen, to be silent and to believe her. '1 heard a dragon. It spoke to me in my thoughts. It was
Silence. He remembered me, Eyrie-Master. He remembered everything. He remembered me'
Isentine didn't say anything. Jaslyn could see the disbelief in his eyes, the refusal to even try
to understand, but he didn't speak,
didn't even shake his head. He things I'm mad. Maybe I am. Mad with grief, mad with loss,
but I know what I heard.
'Your Highness,' he said at last, 'if he is here, where is he?'
Jaslyn shrugged. 'Close, I would think. I don't know. But I have to find him. I have to know
that it's true, that they come back and they remember!'
'Then let us find him. He was yours after all, and if Her Holiness Queen Almiri has a dragon
in her eyrie of the colours of smoke and ash and coal, she will not keep it secret for long.' He
didn't believe her. He'd never believed her. He'd spent forty years and more working with
dragons. They'd never spoken to him in his head; they'd never died and been reborn and
remembered anything. As far as Isentine was concerned, they'd never done anything except
hatch, eat, breed and eventually die like any other animal. Yes, when one died, another was
born and their numbers were always the same, but to Isentine that didn't mean anything. They
were still animals. As long as they had their potions.
None of that mattered. If he helped her, then she would show him and he would have no
choice but to believe her. She stamped her foot and glared at the soldiers. 'They won't let us
roam around among my sister's dragons.'
'No, Your Highness.' Isentine shook his head sadly. 'Unless ... Your Highness, I've badgered
and cajoled Queen Almiri's eyrie-master and been steadfastly refused. The order comes from
the queen herself. But if you promised you would join Almiri in her plans for war ...'

'I do not want a war.' Then Jaslyn almost smiled. She wagged a finger at her eyrie-master. 'I
see. You would have me join her council but not her war.' She walked quickly now, forcing
Isentine to hobble along as best he could in her wake. 'Very well. She can have me at her
table, but I will not throw my dragons into some foolishness.' She took a turn, out of impulse,
down a narrow alley between two low stone storehouses with long windowless walls.
'Hey! Your Highness! Stop!' The voice came from behind her. It sounded like one of Almiri's
soldiers, so Jaslyn ignored it. 'By the command of the queen, you are not permitted to enter ...'
She reached the end of the alley. Several soldiers were in pursuit, but the passage was narrow,
the soldiers were armed and a armoured,
and Isentine was a frail old man, hobbling slowly and in the way. 'Move aside, sir!'
'I am Queen Shezira's eyrie-master, you insolent fellow! And I'm going as fast as I can.'
Jaslyn watched them for a second, smiled, and walked briskly into the eyrie. Not because she
particularly wanted to but simply because she could. She wouldn't get very far. There would
be other soldiers to get in her way. She wasn't sure what they would do if she refused to stop,
if she physically tried to push them out of the way. They surely wouldn't dare to lay a hand on
her, not even on the queen's order.
She did stop though. Her path led her to a huge stone barn. Its immense black doors were ajar
and a warm wind blew out at her from inside. The air reeked of hatchling and heat and death.
Several soldiers stood between her and the door, but the smell would have stopped her
anyway. Her face tightened. The smell was one that every eyrie knew. A hatchling had died.
As she stood there, she heard Isentine, still shouting at Almiri's soldiers, and then the soldiers
arriving behind her.
'Your Highness, by order of the queen, you are not permitted—'
She spun around and slapped the speaker across his face, then turned straight back again. She
didn't move, only watched as the great black doors swung open.
'One of your queen's dragons has died,' she said, very quietly. Anyone who worked in an
eyrie, even the guards, ought to know better than to do anything except be still and to watch
until the alchemists and the Scales had done their work.
Four Scales dressed in heavy leather gauntlets and overalls emerged, dragging behind them a
heavy stone sled. The dead hatchling lay on the sled, curled up. Not covered by anything in
case it caught fire. Two alchemists followed behind. They carried silver bowls hanging from
chains in their hands and they swung them back and forth, gently sprinkling water and their
potions over the hatchling's sizzling scales. All six men wore masks. The alchemists made
potions that mitigated the worst effects of Hatchling Disease, but the strain of the disease
from a dead hatchling was the most virulent of them all. I'.ven the Scales were not immune.
Jaslyn stood very still, watching as they dragged the dragon away. She felt the heat of its
death fade as the body was pulled out of sight. When they were gone she moved very slowly,
surrendering herself to the soldiers behind her, letting them walk her to the edge of the eyrie
and into the inner walls of the Palace of Paths, towards Almiri and her council. None of that
seemed to matter now. She was lost, swallowed by a delirious kaleidoscope of glorious hope
and crushing despair. Never mind that the colours had been all wrong; she knew with a
certainty that she couldn't understand that the dead hatchling had been her Silence.
Reborn.
Remembering.
Which made it all true. Every bit of it.

20

The Council of Kings and Queens
Vale stood on the walls as the skies darkened with dragons. After thirty years in the
Adamantine Guard, the sight of so many still made his heart trip. He'd never seen them in
such numbers before, even when all the kings and queens had come together at the passing of
Iyanza to name Hyram as the next speaker. They flew in from the west and circled over the
palace and then began to land around the edges of the Mirror Lakes. The speaker's eyrie was
already full, but that didn't seem to trouble them. They'd brought their own, he slowly
realised. Everything they needed. The excitement inside him felt strange and he wondered
what was stirring him so. Later, as the skies cleared and the first riders walked their dragons
to the palace gates, he understood. Thirty years in the Guard. He'd seen kings and queens and
speakers come and go, but in all that time the King of the Crags had never come out of his
mountains to the palace. It made you wonder why this time was so special.
Apparently we nearly went to war this morning. All very exciting. I do hope there weren't any
accidents.'
Vale jumped and gritted his teeth. Prince Jehal had somehow crept up behind him.
'Mind you, I suppose we're still not quite sure, eh? My father used to tell stories about the
King of the Crags. Back when he could still string a sentence together of course. Back when I
was a little boy.'
Vale bowed and said nothing. Why are you telling me these things? Do you think that we
shall somehow pretend that we are friends?
Jehal was still talking and it didn't seem to matter to him whether Vale was listening. 'All sorts
of stories. They say the Mountain King has more dragons than any two kings or queens
together. Is it true, Night Watchman. Did you count them?'
'I did not. Your Highness, but it will be done. I would say some
three hundred and fifty beasts, but there are men in the Guard with better eyes than mine.'
'Three hundred and fifty! Ancestors! My father wasn't making it up then.'
What do you want from me? Again Vale held his tongue. The answer was obvious — Jehal
wanted to know whether he would betray the speaker. Well you'll get nothing from me now.
We'll see about that soon enough.
'I wonder if that means that the rest of it's true too.' A procession of dragons was walking up
from the Mirror Lakes. Twenty war-dragons each with four riders on their backs. Three
scorpions mounted on each saddle. Vale frowned at that. It was unusual to see three. Most
eyrie-masters don't mount a scorpion on the nape of the neck like that. Too many accidents
when a rider tries to shoot at an enemy straight ahead of him.
Jehal seemed oblivious. 'My father used to tell tales of mischief,' he said. 'He used to say that
there was another race of people who lived in the mountains. Little people, short, who stood
no higher than the pit of your arm. With mean spirits filled with wickedness. Said they served
the King of the Crags and that he would send them out to sow the seeds of discontent and
rebellion among the good men and women of the realms.'
And why bother when there are teeth and claws and fire that serve the same purpose with a
great deal more effect? Or when we have the likes of you among us? Vale said nothing.
'He said they moved among us, unseen but there nonetheless.'
For a moment Vale couldn't resist. 'The first Valmeyan fought against Vishmir in the War of
Thorns. It is said among the Guard that he ran circles around even your Prince Lai. After
Anzuine executed Speaker Voian, Valmeyan abandoned him and flew to the mountains,

taking half the dragons from the Pinnacles with him. He took his own alchemists. No one
knew where he was.'
Jehal chuckled. 'The Great Dragon Hunt. Yes, I know all about that. Though I don't think he
had much love for his speakers. No, I'd say what he did had a lot more to do with Anzuine and
you Adamantine Men sacking the Silver City. Not a clever thing to do, burning the home of
your foremost dragon-marshal. But I take your meaning. It is true that we of the south have
little love for the
mountain men. My father would say that all bad things have their birth within the caves and
tunnels of the Worldspine.'
'The potions that control your dragons have their origins there, Your Highness,' murmured
Vale.
'You have me again, Night Watchman. Good things have their birth there as well, I dare say.'
'The Great Flame tells us two things: all that brought order to the world came from the
Worldspine long ago; and all that will render the world unto ash will come from there also.'
The prince made a face. 'Don't tell me you listen to that priestly rubbish.'
'I may have forsaken love and a long life, Prince Jehal, but I have not forsaken faith. The
Flame burns brightly among the Adamantine Men.' He spoke mildly, hiding the disgust he
felt. Were you not a prince I would reach out and with one hand I would crush your throat and
snap your spine. He had a flashing vision of ramming his fist right down Jehal's throat and
tearing his tongue out by the roots. It was deeply satisfying.
'I didn't know that,' said the Viper softly. 'I will remember in future. I'm sorry if I offended
you, Night Watchman.'
Vale kept his face blank. 'There is no offence, Your Highness.' You indolent, faithless piece
of shit.
'Good. Then shall we see what the Worldspine has vomited up for us this time?' Jehal
laughed. 'The King of the Crags draws near. And amid the pleasure of our conversation I
seem to have quite forgotten my errand. The speaker has called for you at once. You are to
greet the king on her behalf and escort him to the council of kings and queens. He is late, after
all, and they're all waiting for him. You might mention that to him.'
For a moment the iron control that held Vale Tassan together creaked and shifted. His face
blanched. 'I am to greet the King of the Crags?'
'The speaker is the speaker, and Valmeyan, for all his airs, is still a mere king and must bend
his knee to her. She could not possibly come to him.' Jehal smiled a happy smile. 'Of course,
if you are daunted, I will be happy to take your place.'
Oh I don't think so slippery one. 'I am honoured, Your Highness, and flattered. I will do as I
am commanded, as all Adamantine
Men have always done. You may tell the speaker and the council if you wish.'
Jehal's smile didn't change. 'I think the idea is that you do this with a few thousand of your
Adamantine Men lined up at your back. A show of the speaker's strength, if you like, to
counter Valmeyan's predictably portentous arrival.' He glanced down. 'I would say you have a
few minutes yet before his dragons reach the gates. I do hope that's enough.'
Here came that flashing vision again, except this time Vale simply saw himself smashing
every last one of the Viper's teeth as well. Oh, how I look forward to the day when I can cut
that condescending grin off your lips. His eyes narrowed in concentration. A few minutes to
call four legions or more of men down from the walls and into formation. We can only thank
the Flame that the Dragon Gates are already manned and prepared ... Jehal didn't even move.
Just stood, hands clasped behind his back, watching and smiling. Grinning like a snake. Fine.
Then see why we are feared as we are. He whistled. Loudly. Loudly enough to see Jehal
flinch, which was at least some small consolation. Across the walls, his soldiers turned to
look, waiting for his orders. He made three clear gestures. All legions. Guard of honour.

Immediately. Then he pointed down at the gates. The soldiers with him on the walls didn't
need any telling. They were already sprinting to the nearest legion commanders in case they
hadn't seen the signal. Stupid, stripping the walls for a mere ceremony with so many dragons
camped around the palace. Surely a single legion would have done? He wondered then
whether Jehal had exaggerated, or even made up the speaker's order on some whim of his
own. He didn't think so. It had all the usual thoughtlessness he'd come to expect from Speaker
Zafir.
It's not my place to question such things. All across the palace walls he could see his order
take effect. Soldiers were leaving their posts and streaming down ladders and stairs.
'It's very impressive.' Jehal was still grinning. 'They're very attentive to you, Night
Watchman.'
'We obey without hesitation or question, Your Highness. That is our way. All of us. Such
obedience is necessary to survive when the enemy breathes fire.' Jehal was in the way. Vale
almost had to push past him to get off the tower and down the steps into the vast space
of the Gateyard. By the time he got there, hundreds of soldiers were already massing into
orderly ranks, each man knowing exactly his place within his own legion. With a few curt
snaps of his hands he made small adjustments to the legion positions as they continued to
form. He almost didn't notice that Jehal had followed him.
'It's like watching a master puppeteer at his work. Or a wizard. Does it not leave a mark on
you, Night Watchman, to wield such power with a simple wave of your hands?'
If I was a wizard then I would wave my hands and flick you away as if brushing a fleck of shit
from my sleeve. Vale bowed. 'This is the power of the speaker, Your Highness. Not mine.'
And I don't have the time to have some mongrel prince dancing at my heels. 'All is well in
hand. Please do not allow me to deter you from your business. If it pleases you, you may tell
the speaker that the honour guard will be ready. I will have the gates opened for King
Valmeyan as he approaches.'
Prince Jehal pursed his lips and took a sharp breath. 'Pithy, Night Watchman. You mean
surely there is something more useful I should be doing, and please could I get out of your
way.'
'Not at all, Your Highness.' Although if you're in an obliging frame of mind, perhaps you
could cut yourself on your own tongue and choke to death on your own blood. It would be an
inconvenience to clear up such a mess but I dare say it could be done in time. Vale marched
briskly towards the gates. Still Jehal stayed with him, raising an eyebrow in his wake.
'Well, if I'm truly not distracting you from your duties, the truth is that I have none of my own
and my curiosity compels me to remain. I would see the face of this King of the Crags for
myself.'
'It will be the same face in the council of kings and queens, I don't doubt.' Vale clenched his
teeth. There, see. Now you've made me show my impatience with you. Is that what you
wanted? Can you take your little victory and go away now?
'Doubtless it will. But as I'm sure you are aware, Night Watchman, I am not yet a king, and
thus my presence is not re-quired. I am not sure I shall go.'
'My own opinions are worthless and insignificant but I have noted that Speaker Zafir seems to
value yours, Your Highness.' Vale waved his hands again, shilling the front legions apart.
They
would need more space to allow Valmeyan's dragons to pass between them. Then he snapped
a hand towards the immense gates, which immediately began to open. Outside, King
Valmeyan's dragons were less than a hundred yards from the palace. He fought back the urge
to look over his shoulder, to make sure that his legions were perfect. Of course they were
perfect.

Inch by inch the gates ground open, a hundred men pulling on each of them. Vale walked
forward and stopped inside their shadow. The first of the dragons stepped into the space in
front of him, seeming to squeeze itself down to fit beneath the colossal Gatehouse arch. It
stopped, its head a few feet away from his own. He smelled its breath, hot and rank. The
creature had golden eyes as large as his head, teeth as long as his leg, a head the size of a
horse and a body as big as a barn. A true monster, as large a war-dragon as he'd ever seen.
The sort of creature that could smash down even the mighty Gatehouse towers simply by
crashing into them. It made him tiny, and as it lowered its head to look at him, it sniffed and
its lips twitched, as if to remind him that a dragon this size was always, always hungry.
And here, Vale knew, was his strength, the strength of every man behind him. For where any
normal man would be shaking and quaking and pissing his pants, he stood still, solid and
unmoved. He looked for the fear that any normal man should feel in the presence of such a
monster and found nothing. Nothing at all.
The rider mounted on the war-dragon's neck took off his helm. Prince Tichane. Valmeyan's
second son and ambassador to the palace.
'King Valmeyan,' roared Tichane. 'The King of the Crags answers the speaker's call.'
You should be begging to enter, as every other king begged to enter. And it was not a call but
a summons. Vale bowed. Jehal was still beside him. And he wasn't shaking and quaking and
pissing his pants either. 'The speaker welcomes you and bids you and yours to enter, under the
ancient laws of hospitality,' Vale cried. He was about to move aside to let Tichane and his
monster pass into the Gateyard, but suddenly Jehal had a hand on his shoulder.
'You may pass, Prince Tichane,' shouted Jehal. 'You and all those
behind you. But no dragons save those of the speaker may enter the grounds of the
Adamantine Palace. You should know that.' There was a very long silence.
'You did bring enough riders with you to walk all those poor beasts back to wherever they
came from, I hope?'
Vale kept his face still. It was as well, he decided, that he'd had such extensive practice.
'You're also late,' said Jehal, loudly enough to carry well past Tichane to the riders behind
him. 'The council convened at dawn. If you're lucky, they'll have waited. It would be a shame
for such a grand entrance to be so utterly wasted.'
For long seconds, Prince Tichane didn't move. Then the dragon lowered its head even more,
so that it touched the ground. Tichane opened the buckles on his harness and slid down to the
ground. He ignored Vale and walked up to Jehal. Back outside the palace, other riders were
dismounting.
'You're a rude nasty fellow this morning,' he said. Jehal gave him a florid bow.
'Be careful what you say, Tichane. You'll be calling me Your Holiness before you leave.'
'So I hear. So you are the speaker's mouthpiece today, Jehal. I suppose I should not be
surprised. My father will be disappointed that she isn't here to greet him.'
Jehal replied with a sad shake of his head. 'If King Valmeyan wishes to set himself up as
Zafir's equal, I'm afraid this disappointment will be the first of many. You may find yourself
wishing you hadn't come.'
Tichane snorted. 'Then I will not be alone. Are we to run, then, since we are late?'
'Oh, I dare say a brisk walk will suffice.'
They walked away together, in between the perfect legions of the Adamantine Men and
towards the Chamber of Audience. On the outside, the damage from the Red Riders' attack
had been made good. On the inside though, the chamber still bore the scars. Vale watched
them go and waited. He wasn't here for princes, he was here for a king. He had to wait for the
rest of the riders outside the palace to arrange themselves. One by one the dragons were
turned and walked away. Tit banc's was the last. When it left, two columns

of riders marched through the gates. Vale studied them closely as they advanced. The rider at
their head wore the same armour as the rest of them but he had an aura that Vale knew well.
He was old for a rider too.
As they drew up in front of him, Vale bowed low, exactly as he would bow for any other king
or queen. 'Your Holiness. The speaker welcomes you and bids you and yours to enter, under
the ancient laws of hospitality
They swept past him without a glance. Vale stayed exactly where he was until all the riders
had gone. Then, with a gesture, he ordered the gates closed. As Valmeyan and his riders
marched into the Chamber of Audience, he signalled his legions to return to the walls and
their duties. Back where they should have been in the first place.
Most of them. A few he beckoned towards him. A dozen, that would be enough. They
followed Valmeyan and quietly entered the chamber. The air inside smelled new, rich with
fresh wood and paint. At the far end, Speaker Zafir sat with her kings. Valmeyan was standing
before them. Further away stood riders from all the kings and queens assembled here, bearing
witness to the words of the council, a company of them from every realm, even a few from
the north. Jeiros and Aruch too, alchemists and priests clustered around them. Vale strode
briskly among them, all the way to the speaker's table. All the way to the seat where Prince
Jehal lounged insolently, sneering as the speaker and the King of the Crags exchanged their
first ritual greeting in thirty years. Vale stood behind him. He gave himself a moment to
savour what he was about to do.
'Prince Jehal.'
Jehal looked up. He didn't look troubled so he obviously had no idea what was coming. 'Night
Watchman.'
There weren't many moments of pure joy in the brief life of a Night Watchman. That was
something Vale had come to understand a long time ago, and so he took his time with this
one. 'Prince Jehal,' he said again, lingering on every word, 'you are charged with conspiring to
aid and abet the enemies of the realms. By order of the speaker, you are stripped of all titles
and authorities.'
'What?' Jehal half rose out of his chair. Vale put a heavy hand
on his shoulder, forcing him back down again. You can't begin to imagine how satisfying this
is.
'You will be taken to the Tower of Dusk. There you will stay for the remainder of your days,
awaiting the speaker's sentence.' At a gesture, four of Vale's soldiers seized Jehal and dragged
him out of his chair.
'Zafir!' he shouted, but the speaker's face was cold. She didn't even glance at him. 'Night
Watchman, unhand me! I am quite capable of walking. I am hardly likely to escape.'
Vale didn't look at him. He lowered his voice so that only Jehal would hear. 'True enough.
And I will admit to being impressed that you didn't even flinch in front of Prince Tichane's
monster. But still, all things considered, I think I prefer to have you dragged, Your Highness.'
The Gateyard outside was clear. His legions were already back on the walls and the towers.
Vale took a moment to look around him.
A good day's work and we're hardly even started. He already had a heavy sword sharpened up
for Queen Shezira's head. It could easily take another. One could always hope.

21

The Queen in the Tower
They opened the door, threw him inside and shut it behind him. Jehal sat up and rubbed his
bruises. A pair of servants stared at him, wide-eyed like startled rabbits, then scurried away.
As the door slammed closed, twilight enveloped him. The air was hazy with smoke despite
the height of the room. Shafts of sunlight pierced the walls and lit patches of fire on the floor;
everywhere else danced in flickering shadow.
'Hello Prince Jehal. Please don't get up. I'll shoot you if you do.'
Jehal froze. The voice came from off to one side. Shezira. He turned his head, and there she
was, sitting half hidden by one of the massive columns that vanished into the vaulted gloom
above. She was holding a crossbow, a large one, calmly, steadily pointing it at him.
His heart began to pound. How much does she know?
'The trouble with the condemned,' he said, slowly and softly, 'is that they have very little to
lose. You appear to have been expecting me, Your Holiness.'
'Did you think I was entirely powerless in here? The Night Watchman let slip that you would
be joining me this morning. He also let slip a crossbow and a single bolt. Very careless of
him, don't you think?'
'Very.' An acidic smile settled on Jehal's face. 'I appear to have been well and truly ...
expected.'
'He must hate you very much, Jehal. I know he hates me. He thinks I killed Hyram. I don't
imagine he much cares which one of us dies. He probably hopes for both of us.'
'Did he tell you that I was conspiring with him to help you escape?' Jehal frowned. 'Trying to
conspire with him, at any rate. I wonder how long he pondered my proposal before he ran to
Zafir.'
The Queen in the Tower
'I've heard that you conspired a good deal. I'm left to wonder how much of it is true.'
'Quite a lot of it, I don't doubt.' Jehal shrugged. 'I do so enjoy a good conspiring.'
'As I would enjoy hearing about them.'
Jehal snorted. 'What, so we can pass the time with some civilised conversation and then you
kill me? Why not do us both a favour and get it over with quickly.'
'Killing you is clearly what I'm supposed to do, but I am not inclined to be cooperative. If at
all possible, I mean to shoot you somewhere painful and leave you to live as a cripple. That
would be much more satisfying.'
'Pity you wouldn't be here to watch though, eh. But kill me now and three of the nine realms
will be controlled by your daughters, all baying for war and revenge. I doubt Zafir would
survive for long. I'm surprised you didn't get straight on and do it.'
'I'm not much interested in a war, Jehal.'
Jehal couldn't help but laugh. 'That's what I keep telling them. Although ...' He shrugged and
sighed. 'Not being interested in a war doesn't seem to have done me much good.' Keep
talking. Talking was good. Talking wasn't shooting.
Shezira almost smiled at him, although the crossbow didn't flinch. 'I was under the impression
that you being here to have this conversation had rather more to do with Princess Lystra. It is
a little difficult to decide whether she'll live longer with you dead or with you alive. You
understand, I hope, that she is my only consideration in how I deal with you.'
'Ah.' Jehal let that sink in along with all the implications that came with it. 'Yes. Unfortunate
thing that. I suppose you realise that Zafir had a certain amount of help getting to where she
is. I didn't need to help her seduce Hyram, but I certainly let her steal the potions she gave

him. I allied myself with you and made sure Hyram knew about it. Hyram would have had an
accident around now. Lystra would have followed a year later. I would have married Zafir and
in time I would have succeeded her. That was what we planned, as I'm sure you've already
grasped. But Zafir got impatient and I found something in Lystra that I didn't expect, and so
here I find myself. That is the extent of my conspiracy,
Your Holiness. You can get on with shooting me now if you wish. I should warn you though
that you may miss. If you do, why then I think we shall have some fun.' He shifted onto his
knees, trying to get more comfortable, at the same time readying himself to spring to his feet.
Shezira gave a slight shake of her head.
'You stay sitting exactly where you are. Keep your legs flat on the floor.'
Jehal rolled his eyes. 'If you prefer, Your Holiness, I will lie on my belly. Or on my back, with
my feet in the air.'
'As you are will be perfectly adequate.' Shezira rose out of her chair and came slowly towards
him, but kept a wary distance, circling around him. 'I didn't push Hyram off his balcony, you
know.'
'Yes, I know. I saw.'
'Really?'
'He fell. I've been trying quite hard to convince others of your innocence.'
'Have you now?' Her voice was cold. She didn't believe him, probably didn't believe him
about Lystra either. She was prowling around him now. Her hands on the crossbow were as
steady as stone, and her eyes ... Her eyes showed no forgiveness, no mercy. In the north they
called her the Queen of Stone, the Queen of Flint. Jehal had called her that too, behind her
back, but now he understood what they really meant. His heart skipped. He bit his lip.
'Were you poisoning him, Jehal?' she asked. Jehal hesitated. If he lied, and she already knew
... but he'd undone himself anyway by not answering straight away.
'Yes,' he said.
'And your father?'
This time he was ready. His face twisted into a sneer. 'Everyone seems to think so. Why
should I disappoint you all?'
The look she gave him was a queer one, as if he'd somehow answered another question, one
that she hadn't asked but one that mattered a great deal more. 'And me, Jehal? Why were you
trying to poison me?'
He snorted, surprised. 'You? Why would I poison you? You were no threat to me.' 'I am now.'
'Sadly, my powers of foresight did not predict this little awkwardness. Zafir having me thrown
in a dungeon while she had you put to death, yes, I suppose I half expected that. It being this
dungeon and my good friend the Night Watchman having left you so wickedly dangerous,
that possibility I'm afraid had entirely escaped me.'
'Again, Jehal, why were you trying to poison me? I cannot fathom what you would gain from
it, yet I cannot see who else it could be.'
Jehal furrowed his brow and shook his head. What are you talking about, woman? 'Your
Holiness, I never have tried to poison you. In actual fact, despite all Hyram's little fantasies,
I've murdered remarkably few people. Your daughter, for example. Notably not murdered,
however politically useful it might have been. You. Also not murdered. And I can promise
you, Queen Shezira, that when I aim to make someone dead, they die. I helped Zafir steal the
Speaker's Ring from you, but poison you? No. I would have been quite happy for you to go
back to Outwatch and fester. I've never tried to have you harmed in any way; in fact, since
Hyram stupidly fell off his own balcony, I've done everything I can to keep you alive. Not out
of any love for you, you understand, but, believe it or not, for love of the realms. Of
everything. Of life. Zafir doesn't just want your head. She's going to execute King Valgar as
well, and then she's going to move on to all three of your daughters. I'm trying to stop her.' He

looked ruefully around the Tower of Dusk. 'Not with as much success as I'd hoped, it would
seem.'
Shezira snorted and shook her head. 'Why should I believe a word you say? Hyram called you
a viper, and he wasn't wrong. We all should have listened to him.'
'Your daughter Jaslyn sits on your throne. Almiri rules in Evenspire. With Zafir they will take
all the realms into flames. You don't need me to tell you that.'
'Jaslyn has Hyrkallan to guide her.' For a moment, Jehal wondered how the queen could
possibly know that Hyrkallan had abandoned the Red Riders and returned north. Then he
realised that she probably didn't know that the Red Riders even existed. 'Resides, she cares
more (or her dragons that she does for me.' A touch of bitterness tinged Shezira's voice now.
'She won't go to
war, not for me. The only person she truly cares about is her little sister, your Lystra. Keep
her alive and safe and Jaslyn will stay in her eyries.'
'Lystra is carrying my heir.'
'So I've heard. Another reason to keep her alive.' 'I'm trying very hard to do so.'
Shezira nodded her head. 'Good. Unfortunately, I rather fear for my daughter after she's given
you what you want. So let me give you something that is both help and encouragement.' And
with that, Shezira pointed the crossbow between Jehal's legs and fired.
The force knocked him back across the polished marble floor; and then came the pain,
unbearable, burning, blinding, shrieking pain that seemed to run like liquid fire along every
nerve and bone.
'Zafir will have to find another lover now,' said Shezira, although Jehal could hardly hear her
over the roaring in his head. He couldn't see anything either. 'We are truly tied together now,
blood to blood, Prince Jehal. If my bloodline dies, so does yours.'
The roaring sounds, Jehal realised, were his own screams.

22

The Execution of his Duties
Vale stood, still as a statue, as the Herald of Titles announced each and every sitting member
of the council of kings and queens. Only the monarchs had any real say in what would be
decided, but they'd brought a good few lords and ladies and a smattering of princes and
princesses with them. Vale wondered if it made them feel more important. The other
possibility was that it made them feel safe, a thought which he took as a personal affront.
He, of course, was not sitting and was not announced. His soldiers stood quietly, scattered
around the Chamber of Audience, some more obvious than others, deceptive in their numbers.
A casual glance might say he'd brought only a dozen men to guard the speaker and her guests.
The truth was closer to ten times that number. Some of them were also witnesses. Witnesses
who would say that they'd seen Queen Shezira enter the speaker's rooms, invited in by the
speaker's wordmaster. That they'd heard the speaker call out, shouting for something that they
hadn't been able to understand. That they'd gone into his rooms and found Queen Shezira
standing on his balcony with the speaker already lying dead below.
But none of them actually saw the push. None of them saw him fall. He hadn't given it too
much thought until the kings from the south and the east had started to arrive. Then they'd all
started asking. Did you see it? Did anyone actually see Shezira murder Speaker Hyram.
Narghon's queen, Fyon, she was the worst. By the time she was finished, even the
wordmaster, who'd been adamant that Shezira was guilty, was having his doubts.

/ am the Night Watchman of the dragon-soldiers. We do not have doubt. The Guard are
always certain of their cause. From birth to death. Nothing more, nothing less. Hyram fell.
Shezira pushed. End. I'here is no other explanation that makes sense.
Eventually they finished and Speaker Zafir summoned him to the Table of Judges to speak
what he knew. He did exactly as he was asked. He had gone to the Tower of Dusk to confine
Queen Shezira and her men. The queen was not present in the tower. He had sent other men to
stand watch over Speaker Hyram. When he heard of Speaker Hyram's death, he had ordered
the Tower of Dusk to be stormed. Yes, he'd lost a good few men. Yes, the defenders had
thrown back his first assault, and were only turned to flight by the arrival of the remainder of
the legion. Yes, he had been impatient and possibly foolish, and yes, several of Shezira's
riders had escaped. Including, as it had happened, Queen Almiri.
As soon as they had no more use for him, he bowed and walked away. Others would follow.
His men. Good men. If there were any omissions or any falsehoods in what Vale had said,
none of them knew it. They would tell the truth because they had no reason to do otherwise,
but they would just as easily lie if he told them to. Orders. The Guard obeys orders. From
birth to death. Nothing more, nothing less. Why do they always forget that?
For most of the morning the questions went on. The speaker grew visibly impatient. King
Sirion sat and twisted his fingers in his beard. The King of the Crags looked as if he'd fallen
asleep. Only the two eastern kings, Narghon and Silvallan seemed to care about what anyone
had to say. They all made up their minds before they came here. All of them except Hyram's
cousin.
He'd made up his own mind too. Made it up long ago. As he listened, he wondered whether he
should consider again, question his belief and be sure. But that sort of thinking wasn't going to
get him anywhere. No one had ever asked him for an opinion and he'd never offered one. The
kings and queens of the realms would make their judgement and he would execute it. That
was all.
So why are my knuckles clenched white? Why is the inside of my head burning?
'Enough!' Zafir stood up and slammed the point of the Adamantine Spear into the marble
floor. The blade drove at least three inches into the stone. Vale wasn't sure that Zafir even
noticed. She glared out from the Table of Judges at all the standing members of the council.
'The kings and queens of the dragon-realms will pass their judgement. I say Queen Shezira
murdered Speaker
Hyram. We have a hundred witnesses to say they were alone and that no one else could have
been with them. My husband was old. He was sick and drunk and hardly able to defend
himself, but not so sick and drunk that he'd simply fall off a balcony. Shezira was desperate
and had every reason to want revenge. Further, I say that King Valgar and Knight-Marshal
Lady Nastria were her pawns. I say that their efforts to murder me were at her command.' She
turned her glare onto the sitting council. 'What say you? King Sirion, your judgement, please.'
Sirion didn't move. He was shaking his head and couldn't have looked less comfortable. 'I'll
not condemn another king on such flimsy evidence,' he said. 'If Shezira's knight-marshal was
truly set on murder that night, she would not have taken her orders from anyone but Shezira
herself. I say Valgar has committed no crime. Shezira ...' He took a deep breath and shook his
head even more. 'I don't know. Hyram was my cousin. My heart calls for justice and
vengeance. But I cannot, despite the evidence, believe that Queen Shezira would murder him
with her own hand. I simply cannot. I have nothing to say. I do not pass judgement.'
Zafir's face darkened with fury. 'He was your cousin! Who else was there to push him?'
'I have given my verdict,' snapped Sirion. He didn't look at Zafir when he said it though. He
looked like a man who'd be wondering whether he'd done the right thing for a very long time.
The speaker sneered. 'And we all know that Shezira offered her daughter to Prince Dyalt. Has
little Jaslyn not thought better of marrying a fool?'

'You have my answer.' Sirion stood up. 'I will not be the one to start a war, Speaker, and if
you mean to do so, I suggest you consider who are your allies and who are your enemies very
carefully. You'd not be the first speaker who failed to see out their first year.' With that, Sirion
walked away from the Table of Judges. The lords and princes of his entourage got up to
follow him.
Vale flinched. His hand moved to rest on his sword and he almost took a step forward, he was
so sure that Zafir would command Sirion's arrest. What he'd said was nothing short of a threat.
Yet Zafir watched him go in silence. She only spoke when he and his were gone from the
Chamber of Audience.
'It seems King Sirion does not share my opinion.' She was all smiles now. 'King Silvallan,
what say you?'
'You can have Valgar if you must. I venture no opinion on his guilt or otherwise. But you may
not have Shezira. She did not murder Speaker Hyram.'
Zafir nodded slowly. 'Are those your words or Jehal's?'
'They are mine, Speaker.'
'And you, Narghon? I imagine your words will be exactly the same, almost as though
someone had written them down for you both. Although they are your words, I am sure.'
'I share King Silvallan's views. Shezira cannot be condemned without a witness who saw
Hyram fall. Accept your defeat with some grace, Your Holiness, and accept that it is for the
good of the realms that Shezira goes free.'
'Then it seems I am alone. They sent an assassin after me and then, when she failed, they
killed my husband. Yet none of you will condemn them.' Vale bit his lip. This is how Jehal
said it would be. Shezira will go free. There will be no war between the north and the south,
and the legions I command will not be hurled into battle against a sky filled with dragons. He
wasn't sure how he felt about that. The Adamantine Men were made for battle. Forged for it
from the day they could walk and talk. They had no other purpose to their existence. The
thought of war made Vale's heart race and his blood run hot. His head filled with visions of
glory, of slaughtering riders and scattering their dragons. Any of the Adamantine Men would
think themselves lucky and honoured to be called to war. After all, that's what they were told
from the day they took up their first training spears.
On the other hand, he was the Night Watchman. They were his men, and his second duty,
after his devotion to the speaker, was to them. To their strength and to their lives and to their
health, not to honour and glory. The Viper was right about one thing. Wars were bloody. Very
many would die and few would be dragon-lords.
'King Valmeyan. Since you have graced my palace with your presence, what say you? Do you
have an opinion to offer, or do you intend to doze until all the matters of this council have
been closed.'
The King of the Crags barely opened his eyes. 'I've heard one
voice either way for King Valgar, am I right? I've never met him and probably never will. If I
remember the law, the speaker casts the final judgement if the council is tied, so I will offer
no opinion. King Valgar's fate rests entirely in your hands, Speaker. As for Queen Shezira,
she I have met. She came to my eyries a decade and more ago, seeking my support to ensure
Hyram sat where you sit now. I say she is quite capable of murdering a man. Perhaps she did,
perhaps she didn't. I leave her fate in your hands too, Speaker Zafir. Shezira is guilty.' He
uncoiled himself from his slouch, slowly stretched and turned to look Zafir in the eye. 'You
hold a very sharp spear in your hand, Speaker. Who will you cut with it?'
The smile that curled across Speaker Zafir's mouth made even Vale's stomach turn. The
feeling was strange and new, until he realised what it was. Not fear, that was too strong a
word. Anxiety. Yes, he was anxious.

She was looking at him now. 'Then they are both guilty. Yes. Since it is the duty of the
speaker to cast sentence, they are both guilty and they are to be beheaded. Their remains will
hang in cages by the gates of the Adamantine Palace, one on either side, until they have been
picked clean by the crows. They will serve to warn all others who would overthrow the laws
of the realms.'
King Silvallan hammered the table with his fists. 'You cannot do this!'
'I can and I will. Today, Night Watchman. As soon as possible. Valgar first. Let Shezira see!
Go! Do it now!
The Table of Judges was in uproar. Silvallan and Narghon were on their feet. Jeiros and
Aruch were shouting at each other. Only the King of the Crags seemed unmoved. He'd
slumped back into his seat and if anything looked as though he'd fallen asleep again. Vale
hesitated. All his instincts said he ought to stay, that there was every sign of the council
coming to blows. But he'd been given an order, clear and unambiguous. Reluctantly he bowed
towards the chaos, turned and walked away. The Adamantine Men who served as his officers
were all quite capable of taking his place. When it came to war, they had to be.
Outside, he set about the execution of his duties. Orders were given. The Guard had quietly
prepared for this for days, just as
they'd prepared for Shezira to be released. They all knew what to do. One company of men
would bring out the headsman's block and sword and throw plenty of sand down into the
Gateyard to soak up the blood. Another company would drag Valgar out of the tower where
Zafir had imprisoned him. He'd get Shezira himself. The cages were a little unexpected.
They'll need some quick work to get ready but at least we have a little more time with those.
She never said what she wanted us to do with the heads. Mounted on spikes would be usual.
At the doors to the Tower of Dusk, Vale stopped. His head was filled with all the little details;
underneath, something much bigger was stirring. He was old enough and wise enough to
know what that meant. Doubts. He had doubts about what he was doing. And since
Adamantine Men never had doubts, he was trying to hide them.
Come on then, doubts. Speak your piece and be done. There will be war, is that it? Shezira's
daughters will fly out of the north on wings of fire. And out of the south too, perhaps. What of
it? Many will die, but what of it? Is it my doing? Have I gone to their eyries and commanded
their riders to fly against the speaker, who is their law? No, I have not. Or do I doubt that we
will win? Well, doubts, if that's the case, I've seen enough of these kings and queens over the
years to know that Zafir is safe. If any of them truly have the spine to take up arms against us,
as likely as not they will be stabbed in the back by their own sons and daughters, hungry for a
throne of their own. So be gone, doubts. My conscience is clear.
His doubts didn't seem convinced but they knew their place. They slid beneath the surface of
his thoughts to lurk in the depths of his dreams. He ordered the door to the Tower of Dusk to
be opened and entered with a dozen men behind him. He went in with care because Queen
Shezira did have a crossbow, after all, and there was just a chance she hadn't done what he'd
hoped and used it on Jehal. But he soon saw that he needn't have worried. The floor was
stained by a big pool of blood, still sticky to the touch. Jehal, assuming that's from whom the
blood had come, had obviously survived for long enough to drag himself away.
Not very far though. Thick brown streaks led away from the blood to a second pool. Jehal
looked dead at first, curled up, both
hands pressed between his legs. The Viper was still breathing, though. The breaths might have
been ragged and shallow, but if he'd lived this long then he probably wasn't going to bleed to
death.
Pity. This was meant to wound. If Shezira had meant to finish him, she had ample means. He
stooped to look closer. The crossbow bolt he'd given Shezira was gone. Shezira was still
dangerous then. Then a huge grin spread across Vale's face as he understood what the Queen

of Stone had done to the Viper. He glanced around him, the sudden thought of finishing Jehal
off running wild in his head, but there was no way to do it without being seen. Too many of
his own men.
His grin faded. He kicked Jehal in the face and moved on. Shezira was waiting for him, calm
and peaceful, holding the crossbow he'd given her, casually pointing it in his direction.
'What's it to be?' she asked. Vale didn't answer, didn't break stride. He saw the tension in her
face, saw her finger on the trigger straining. He saw the moment she understood that he'd
come to taker her to her death. He saw her pull the trigger and stepped sideways exactly at the
same moment. The bolt struck one of the men behind him, who grunted. He saw the fright in
her face, a momentary fleeting thing, and then he reached her. He tore the crossbow out of her
hands with a casual force and threw it away. Doubtless she held some idea of walking with
calm dignity to her death, but Vale was having none of that. You murdered Hyram. Murdered
a speaker. For that he had her dragged out of the tower by her hair. By the time he got back to
the executioner's block, Valgar was already there, pushed down, held over the basket that
would hold his head after his body no longer had any need of it. A few dozen of the
Adamantine Guard stood around. Several dozen more were running into the Chamber of
Audience. The council of kings and queens, it seemed, had spiralled out of hand. As expected.
Do it now! That's what the speaker had said, and so Vale didn't wait. He lifted the headsman's
sword, a strange weapon with its weight and balance all wrong for fighting, but perfect for
this one specific duty.
Hold her head and make her watch,' he said of Shezira. 'Those were the speaker's order s. She
has to watch.' At least Shezira wasn't
begging or pleading or shouting. She was as calm as anyone could reasonably be. She was
afraid though, badly afraid, and that made her less than the men holding her. She kept trying
to tell Vale something about Hyram and the night he'd died, but he wasn't listening. Whatever
she had to say, he had no wish to hear it.
He turned back to Valgar and lifted the sword. 'Whatever you have to say, there's little point.
No one is here to hear it and no one will remember it. No one has come to witness your end,
either of you.'
The sword sang as it swung through the air. It cut through King Valgar's flesh as though his
neck was made of cheese — a slight resistance but nothing more. Soldiers dragged the body
away. Vale left the head and the basket where they were. Let the last thing Shezira saw be the
severed head of her greatest ally.
In a blink she was on the block, held still, ready for him. He lifted the sword.
'I didn't push Hyram, Night Watchman.' That's what she'd been telling him for weeks. Months.
He wasn't interested. Her voice was ragged. I ought to be silent. Whatever she says, it changes
nothing.
'That is not my concern. The council has spoken.'
'He would have died without me, Night Watchman.'
'But he didn't, Your Holiness. He died with you.'
Her voice broke. Was she sobbing? Whatever her last words were, Vale didn't hear them.
Something about alchemists and Jeiros and Hyram and poison, all spilling out of her mouth in
a garbled mess.
He brought down the sword, and after that Shezira had nothing more to say.

23

Watching Things Burn
They slipped between the mountains of the Purple Spur in twilight. They were safe then,
Semian thought, in the few short hours either side of darkness. In the daylight hours they hid
from Zafir's dragons flying overhead, losing themselves among the cavernous valley forests,
between trees that made even their dragons seem small. Mostly they slept. At night they
loitered near streams, drinking and feeding, never staying in one place for long. They could
move about at night. The speaker's riders would be in their cups, their dragons safely tucked
up in their eyries when the sun went down. Only the day belonged to the enemy.
When they were close to the eastern end of the Spur, the palace end, they slipped out only in
the dark, flying down through the valleys, skimming the earth, a few miles every day, no
more. The dragons hated it, flying low in the dark. Their restless anxiety suffused their riders
but Semian drove them on. They forayed out to the plains and left the Picker and the bloodmage a day's walk from the City of Dragons. They could do that now, for the blood-mage had
served his purpose. Then they slipped away again, back into the safety of the peaks. The
speaker never knew how close they were.
And there they waited. Semian sat quietly while his new acolytes fretted around him. The
Great Flame had brought him here, he knew that. He could feel it. Taking the Picker and
Kithyr to the city to be their spies was an excuse, a cloak of shadows obscuring something
greater. In truth, he was sorry to be rid of the blood-mage. A strange understanding had grown
between them as the magician had worked to save his leg. The man served the Flame with a
deep and strange passion, and Semian felt stronger when he was around.
The Flame had called him though. Called him here. His leg
was far from healed, would probably never heal, but there was no poison in the wound any
more. The magician had done what was needed, and so, with regrets, Semian had let him go.
We both have a greater purpose. That's what the mage had said, and Semian understood him
perfectly. In his dreams, the priest with the burned hands came to him night after night,
always the same. Wait. Be strong. There is a thing you have to do.
On the day their food ran out, a mosquito landed on Semian's arm. Semian raised his hand to
squash it and then paused. The mosquito was already bloated.
When blood comes to you, you must heed it...
He let it settle and bite him. Knowledge flowed into his veins. Shezira and Valgar are dead ...
There was more, much more. King Tyan, Jehal, Valmeyan. All good. All speaking of chaos,
of the realms bleeding and begging to be saved. When he knew it all, Semian slapped his arm,
crushing the mosquito in a smear of blood. Not his blood. Kithyr's blood. Mage's blood. He
thought it might burn his skin but it didn't.
He savoured what he knew, picking and choosing what he would share with the other Red
Riders. They'd sworn themselves to Hyrkallan to avenge Hyram's death and free Shezira.
They'd failed, but that wasn't really the point any more. They served the Great Flame now.
They were his. Sixteen dragons, twenty riders.
They would have to do something, he decided. He wanted to hurt Zafir again but that was
getting difficult. She was becoming cautious. Her dragons were everywhere and so were the
Adamantine Men. Drotan's Top, maybe. That was always a weak point. If he threw everything
he had against it, perhaps ...
No. He smiled to himself as he realised what he must do, what he now knew he had come
here to do. He ordered his riders into the air at dawn, but he didn't take them west and back
towards the sanctuary of the Worldspine. He took them north, out over the Great Cliff at the

Emerald Cascade and high over the arid plains beyond, into the Stone Desert and Queen
Almiri's lands and to the Evenspire Road. They flew all day, closer to the sky than the earth,
or so it seemed. The Great Flame watched over them and none of Zafir's riders happened their
way. As the sun sank, he dipped low, so the tiny dots and lines on the land below grew into
monstrous
outcrops of dark red stone in the dusty earth and the shadows that stretched for miles behind
them. And there, on the Evenspire Road, he saw what he was looking for. A great column of
soldiers and wagons. Lots and lots of wagons.
He led his riders in with the sun at their backs against a full legion of the Adamantine Men.
Enough, if Prince Lai was right, to defeat more dragons than he had; but then Prince Lai had
been talking about a pitched battle, a fight to take and hold ground where one side either fled
or was destroyed. Semian had no interest in land. He didn't want the wagons or their precious
cargo. All he wanted was to watch them burn.
No, that wasn't right either. As he skimmed the flat and lifeless earth, as the beating of
Vengeance's wings threw up great clouds of dust behind him, as the soldiers bellowed their
alarms and ran to form their shield walls, he no longer cared. The wagons could burn
unwatched as long as they burned. What he wanted was to fly, to fight, to rain fire from the
sky. Nothing, nothing felt like this, to sit on the back of a monster whose wings reached out a
hundred feet on either side yet who could turn like a swallow. Whose claws and teeth could
crush men like eggs, whose tail could smash castles and swat horses as though they were flies.
And yet who could pick up their shattered riders when they fell and then guard them with
gentle patience.
A scorpion bolt hissed over Vengeance's shoulder. A second hit the dragon in the chest, and
Semian felt a surge of anger, anger that bloomed into exultation as he closed on his enemy.
More bolts arrowed past him. Another pieced Vengeance's wing, more struck the riders
behind him, but none came for him. He was charmed. Blessed. Shielded by the Great Flame.
Teeth and claws and tail, but above and beyond all that...
He flicked down the visor on his helm at the last second. He felt Vengeance tremble and
heard the roar of fire. He tasted the air turn hot and scorched and he breathed deeply, sucking
in the smell of war, of charred wood and seared flesh. He pressed himself flat on Vengeance's
neck, closed his eyes and savoured it while Vengeance passed close over the heads of the
soldiers, lashing them with his tail. As the dragon rose, Semian lifted his visor again.
Vengeance wanted more, wanted to turn and strike and burn and strike and
burn until everything was crushed, but Semian checked him. No.
He looked over his shoulder as they flew away. At least four of his riders were dead, their
dragons pulled to the ground by the weight of the training they were given as hatchlings,
conditioned to defend their fallen riders no matter how broken they became. He had no idea
how many Adamantine Men he'd slain. Not many, probably. But most of the wagons were
smashed and ablaze, that was what mattered. The wagons carried potions. He knew that from
the way they were guarded, knew that from his days at the alchemists' redoubt, the place
where he'd been reborn.
No more potions for the speaker. That would do very nicely. He led his dragons away.
But it wasn't perfect. He hadn't counted the wagons. There had been perhaps as many as a
dozen. A few had likely survived. Even one, it suddenly struck him, was too many.
So after half an hour had passed, as the sun drooped across the horizon, he led his dragons
back across the desert and they did it all again. As things turned out, he did want to watch
things burn after all.

Three

The White Dragon
24

The Worldspine and the Hills Beyond
The deeper they flew into the Worldspine, the taller the mountains became. Jagged spikes and
streaks of rock stuck out, black and brutal, from the monotony of snow below. The trees fell
away, then the lakes, and then everything except the glacial ice and stone. They had nothing
to eat and only melted snow and ice to drink. Each day they flew higher, until the air grew so
thin that Kemir could barely lift an arm before he was out of breath. If he hadn't had Snow to
keep him warm, the cold would have frozen him hard in an hour. After the first day, the wind
of Snow's flight was so biting that he could hardly raise his face to see where they were going;
when he did, even through the dragon-rider's visor he wore, he felt as though the skin was
being flayed from his flesh by a thousand razors dipped in acid. After the first day he had
cramps from clenching his muscles, from hugging Snow so tightly. By the end of the second
he could barely move. And then there were the nights. If the days were cold, what were the
nights?
'Dragon, do you even know where are you going?' he slurred, when he decided for the
hundredth time that he'd had enough. The roar of the wind whipped his words away but the
dragon heard him. He wasn't sure quite how it worked, but as far as Kemir could tell, Snow
could hear him think.
To the other side, Kemir. Snow's thoughts were far away, lost in distant memories that she
kept carefully to herself. She wasn't really paying attention and Kemir was slowly starting to
recognise the difference.
'I know the realms backwards and forwards, top to bottom. I've never heard of an other side to
the Worldspine.'
Whatever you have heard, Kemir, that is where we are going. Everywhere has an other side.
The Worldspine and the Hills Beyond
'And what if it doesn't, eh?' he grumbled. 'What if it goes on like this for ever, getting taller
and taller?'
Then you will die of hunger and I will eventually follow. But nothing goes on for ever,
Kemir.
That made him laugh. 'Except you. You go on for ever. And it's all very well you talking
about dying. Even when you die, don't you just come back again?'
That is true.
'Well I don't. You might live for ever, but I've just got what I've got, and I'd quite like to make
the most of it.'
How are you so sure, Kemir? He could feel Snow's thoughts moving back to him, growing
warmer and closer. When she tried, she could almost pretend that she wasn't a monster.
We are different, that is all. And we are not eternal. We were made, long ago, by sorcerers as
old as the world. When that world ends, we will end with it, just as everything else.
'It doesn't look like it's ending any time soon to me.'
Between our lives in flesh and bone we walk the realms of the dead. I have seen things there.
Things that should not be. They have broken loose of the sorcery that held them still. There is

a hole where one of the four pillars of creation once stood. Tell me, Kemir, would you know
the end of the world if you saw it?
'I don't know, but all I see right now is white down and blue up, with some more white and
blue coming up in the middle distance, and far, far away, probably a hundred miles from here,
guess what I can see? Can you guess? Yes! More of exactly the same. How far have we flown
since that lake, eh?' He had to hiss the words out between clenched teeth, not daring to
breathe too deep lest the cold strip the flesh from his lungs.
Not far enough to have reached the other side.
Kemir gave a frustrated groan and shifted to press himself face down onto the dragon's scales,
trying to keep warm. 'That's a dragon answer, not a real answer. Whether there's another side
or not, I definitely won't go on for ever if we keep going like this much further.' There was no
getting off though. He was stuck here, for better or for worse. Which means there's really not
much left to do but grumble and gripe about it, is there?
You are right, 1 am getting hungry again.
There was a pause, and then Kemir snarled 'Was that a joke, dragon? Was that humour?
Because if it was, it was a long way from being funny.' It had only been two days, but the
ever-present driving freezing wind had almost pushed Nadira from his mind.
It is the answer as you would have given it.
'Yes.' Now Kemir chuckled. 'I suppose it is. Well that's me told then.' His anger faded. 'I hope
you're right, dragon. I hope there is an end to this. It would really piss me off to have saved
you only to have you starve to death.' And Nadira deserves better than that too. That would
make her death about as pointless as it's possible to be.
You did not save me, Kemir.
'No? So everything would have been just dandy if you'd done what you wanted to do and
stayed to watch Ash and the others burn from the inside? You, for some reason, would have
been spared?' For a brief moment he risked a glance down. The wind tore at his face and froze
his tears to his cheeks and all he could see was an endless featureless white.
No. But you did not save me, Kemir. The ice-water of the lake did that.
'And who dragged you to the lake, dragon?'
I have said I am grateful for your advice, Kemir.
'You don't sound it.' Every conversation eventually came to this, mainly because Kemir
couldn't stay away from it. He'd saved the dragon's life. He knew it; the dragon knew it;
Nadira knew it-had known it; probably even the alchemists knew it, but the dragon was
damned if she was going to admit it. Even gratitude came with grudging reluctance. The
whole idea that she might have been even a bit helped by a mere 'little one' seemed to be a
severe embarrassment. Did dragons feel embarrassed? Did dragons feel anything? He didn't
know, but this one certainly acted like she did. Stupid, really. What am I going to do? Run to
all the other dragons, point my finger at her and laugh?
Very hungry indeed, Kemir.
Oh. Yes. Reading thoughts. Well then you know I'm still terrified of you, dragon. In my own
strange little way. And I still despise you for what you did.
Snow, Kemir. The name your kind gave me is Snow. It is not my true name, but it will
suffice.
'Just don't waste me, Snow. You need me. Don't waste me like you wasted Nadira. You need
what I know.' Yes, and I'll keep telling myself that. Eventually at least one of us might believe
it. Ancestors! What am I doing here?
Staying alive. That's what he was doing, even if he had to remind himself from time to time.
Not taking his choice of either freezing or starving beside a glacier lake somewhere in the
depths of the Worldspine, that's what he was doing. Living and breathing. Desperately
existing. Just like he'd always done. Waiting for his first chance to get off and run away.

You know I cannot let you go.
He had no idea how far they flew. They might have been in the air for three days and nights,
or else he might have missed one in the general numbness of cold and hunger and it might
have been four. He was dizzy with fatigue by the time he noticed that the air was warmer
again. When he next bothered to look, he saw that the mountains were shrinking. There were
lakes and rivers below them again, dark little lines in the shadows of their valleys, bright
flashes of light where they caught the sun. As the dragon let herself glide ever lower,
gleaming white snowfields rose up to either side of them. They flew between tufts of cloud
snagged on jagged black peaks that fell away into grey stone slopes and black valleys filled
with trees. Snow flew on and the mountains shrank still more, fading into crumpled hills and
then into an endless sea of rolling forest. Kemir, too exhausted and ravenous to think, felt the
dragon's hunger mingling with his own. As the trees spread out further below them, he felt an
irritation growing inside him, too. Snow again.
Do you see anything for me to eat, Kemir?
Kemir peered down over Snow's shoulder. 'All I see is trees.' His eyes were too tired to focus,
so all he saw most of the time was a great big dark blob that was the ground.
I do not like trees. It is hard to find prey.
Kemir digested that. 'That's why we outsiders build our villages deep in the valley forests,' he
told her. 'So you and your dragon-riders won't find us. And up on stilts so that the snappers
won't eat us while we're sleeping.'
They found a river. Snow dropped to follow it, still far above the
treetops but close enough that Kemir could make out the individual trees. He looked wistfully
to either side, out across the misty green expanse. Not just trees but a great forest like the
Raksheh Forest of the realms. He saw deer too, coming out to drink at the edge of the water.
Too small for Snow, but perfect for a man with a bow. He closed his eyes. I could live here. I
could hunt and build a shelter and stay out in the wilderness. Just let me off here and leave me
be. I don't mind being alone. Just let me rest and sleep and have something to eat. Leave me
be with my ghosts.
No. Snow flew on until the green hills petered away and the river drained into a lake.
Look.
Kemir leaned forward and peered down at the water. He could see the ripples of a tiny boat
and, as Snow dropped closer, he made out a single person sitting in it. Excitement gripped
him. 'Land!'
Why? There is only one of them and they are small and skinny. Barely a mouthful.
'It's a boat, dragon. And a person. Where there is one of us there will be more, and where you
find people you'll find cattle.'
Is that so? Your kjnd have changed then, for that is not how I remember the world.
Without warning, Snow tucked in her wings. They plunged out of the sky and Kemir was
suddenly too busy holding on to see what she was doing. He might have been strapped into a
dragon-knight's saddle, but he still couldn't quite bring himself to trust the thing. He gripped
Snow's scales, fingers rigid as they levelled out and skimmed across the lake. He caught a
glimpse of the boat again, straight in front of them, then Snow suddenly started to climb.
Kemir pitched forward, smacking his face into the dragon's back. He thought he heard a
scream, but he couldn't be sure.
Ah! Useless! Your kjnd are too fragile. Snow tossed something up into the air in front of
them. Kemir was sure he saw flailing arms and legs before she snatched it into her jaws.
'That was the person from the boat, wasn't it?' No, no. I don't want to know. I don't want to
think about it.
I did not mean to break him.
'You didn't have to eat him!'

I am hungry, Kemir. I have barely eaten in close to ten passings of the sun. Ahh ...
The taste of Snow's thoughts changed. Kemir felt a satisfaction, an anticipation. She changed
her course, arrowing across the lake. Kemir tried to see what she'd spotted.
A house. He saw a house at the edge of the lake. More of a hut than a house. With people,
standing and staring at them ...
He saw them for an instant, saw their faces, their mouths open, their eyes wide, their feet
frozen to the spot in terror, too stupefied to run away; and then Snow opened her mouth and
spat fire. A wall of burning air erupted in front of them. Snow slammed through it. Kemir
screamed. Snow screamed. There might have been other screams too, but if there were then
Kemir didn't hear them. He covered his face with his hands and wrapped his arms around his
head, all far too late. He could smell scorched hair. His hair.
The next moment Snow crashed into the ground. Wood split and splintered. Kemir pitched
forward, thrown helplessly back and forth and only kept on Snow's back by the saddle. Her
head and neck lunged forward and she spat fire again. Kemir cowered, pressing himself into
her, covering his face as best he could, but there was no burning wall of air this time. She
lunged a second time and then a third, and then she stopped.
'What have you done?' he whispered. His hands and arms and face were agony. His clothes
were still hot to the touch and smelled burned. Snow, he realised, was eating. Behind the hut
had been a tiny fenced field with perhaps half a dozen pigs in it. They were all burned now.
The smell of them made his mouth water, made him remember how long he too had been
without food. The dragon was picking them off the ground with her claws, tossing them into
the air and catching them in her mouth. The way his cousin Sollos used to eat grapes.
I am still hungry. This is not enough.
He didn't want to think about the people he'd seen. Maybe Snow had eaten them already.
Maybe she was saving them for later. They were certainly dead. Burned to a crisp.
'I'd like to get down.'
Are you sure? You are far safer where you are.
He ignored her. Slowly and painfully, he undid the straps and
harnesses that held him in the saddle. He half slid, half fell to the ground. When he looked at
his hands they were bright red. They were sore and getting worse. Burnt. Add that to the fact
that every joint and muscle already hurt from their flight across the mountains and there was
nothing left. 'Was that necessary, dragon?'
When he didn't get an answer, he moved gingerly through the smouldering wreckage to the
shore of the lake. He lay down on the edge of the land with his face half in the water, his arms
stretched out in front of him. The water was deliciously cool. The pain eased. He drank a
little. It tasted good.
Behind him he heard the dragon shift, scattering more wreckage, and then a thin wailing
shriek. When he looked around, Snow was holding a boy in her claws. She was going to eat
him.
'No!' Kemir jumped to his feet waving his arms. 'No, Snow! Don't! Don't you dare!'
Her mouth was already open. She looked at him and cocked her head. But I am hungry,
Kemir. Why should I not eat?
'Why? Why? Because that's a person, that's why! A boy! Like me!'
It is food, Kemir.
'It's a boy, you stupid dragon. Half grown. Hardly even worth eating. You can't ...' How did
you reason with a dragon. 'Am I food? Is that all I am?'
Snow's expression didn't change. He was food. Now he had time to think about it, yes, that
was what she thought of him. Nadira had been food.
You have also been useful, Kemir. Perhaps you will be useful again.

'Useful food.' He sat down and started to laugh, or to cry, or perhaps a bit of both. He wasn't
sure and he certainly didn't care. 'Useful food. Is that what I am?'
Yes.
'Useful didn't save Nadira, did it, dragon?'
Snow almost shrugged. But, Kemir, she was not useful at all. She knew nothing. She had no
other value.
'Because you had me to tell you about the world?' He could have cried.
Yes. I see this troubles you, but it is the natural order of things.
'Troubles me? You could say that, yes.' I'm shouting. Shouting at a dragon. Not good. He tried
to gather his thoughts. 'When I stop being useful, Snow. What happens then?'
Then we part, Kemir. Or before, if that is what you wish.
'And if you happen to be hungry when we part, I get eaten?' He looked away. 'No. Don't
answer that. I don't think I want to know.'
I will not eat you just because I am hungry. I will eat you so that you cannot speak of me to
others of your kind. Or mine.
The boy was still dangling from Snow's claw. He seemed to have fainted. Kemir picked up a
stone and hefted it in his hand. 'Then you let him go. Either that or you eat us both right now.
Snow didn't move. She looked at him for a long time. Silent, eyes blank, alien and
impenetrable. As he met her gaze, Kemir discovered something that he didn't expect. He
meant it. Really, really meant it. They were both outsiders, him and this boy. They'd both seen
their homes destroyed by dragons, their families, their entire worlds. 'He's like us, Snow,' he
said, more softly this time. 'He's a nest-mate too. You're alone, I'm alone and now so is he.' He
shook his head. 'You have to be different, Snow. If you can't be different then leave us be.
Leave us here. I want no part of you.'
Gently, Snow lowered the boy to the ground at Kemir's feet. He must have been about ten,
Kemir decided. Still a boy but not far away from being a man. Old enough to be useful.
Old enough to be useful, repeated Snow. I think I understand.
'He's older than you, dragon. And we're all useful. All of us. In our different ways.'
Yes. Snow picked up the charred remains of what was probably one of the boy's parents and
gobbled it down. That is true.

25

Strange Lands
The boy ran away the first chance he got. Kemir didn't bother to look for him. Either he knew
how to survive in the forests around the lake or he didn't. If he did, good luck to him; if he
didn't then he'd be back and Kemir had quite enough other things to worry about.
Burns, for a start. When Snow had breathed fire his hands had taken the worst of it. The skin
blistered and peeled over the days that followed; the damage wasn't deep and eventually
they'd heal, but until they did he couldn't hunt, couldn't even string his bow, and that put paid
to any idea of running away. All he could do was ease the pain in the cold water of the lake
and hope that the healing would be clean and the wounds wouldn't go bad. That and shout at
the dragon, telling her what to do.
Snow spent the next morning smashing down trees, pulling them out of the ground and
hurling them into the lake. She was at it for hours, and Kemir couldn't understand what she
was doing until she finally stopped, stood at one end and started to run. Each pounding step
made the ground shudder. When she reached the end of the space she'd made, she stretched

out her wings and launched herself out over the lake. Her back claws and her tail slashed the
water, sending a tower of spray into the air, and then she was up and gone. She went hunting
on her own every day after that, for longer and longer each day, until some nights she didn't
come back at all. Kemir didn't ask where she went or what she found, but sometimes she told
him anyway. There are others of your kind. They are far away, along the river. There are
homes like this one and then villages and then towns. I do not know if they are useful or if
they are yet more of your nest-mates, so I did not eat them. There are cows and horses too.
They are more filling but not as much fun.
She brought the boat back to the shore, which meant he could go
fishing once his hands started to heal. Then he found some mushrooms but they only gave
him cramps. Finally, after Kemir lost his temper and shouted at Snow about how he was
slowly starving to death, the dragon came back in the twilight with a cow. She gathered a
mound of smashed-up wood and set it on fire. As the stars rose, she ripped the cow into pieces
and tossed them onto the flames. Kemir had to laugh.
'I used to have nights like this with Sollos. We spent enough of our lives sleeping under the
stars. We had fires like this all the time. Strips of meat were a bit smaller though ...' His voice
trailed away into wistful memories. Sollos. Killed by that bastard rider.
If you starve, you will not be useful nor even much good as food.
'Ha ha. That dragon humour kills me.'
She didn't understand. He knew the sound in his head now, when he said something that Snow
couldn't make into any sense, or else couldn't be bothered to try. Something like a shrug and a
sigh. He felt that now as Snow ate the remnants of the carcass. Then she sat on her haunches
and watched him. The fire lit up the scales of her belly and her neck. Sparkling embers
spiralled up around her head. When she stretched out her neck she was as tall as the trees. Her
tail was even longer. Yet, for all her size, she was skinny. Lean and sleek, not like the squat
irresistible power of a war-dragon.
Tell me what you know about the alchemists.
Kemir laughed and shook his head. 'No chance, dragon. Then I won't be useful any more and
you'll eat me.' The smell of roasting cow was making him weak at the knees.
She looked at him, then slowly reached into the fire and took the first lump of dead cow
between her teeth. Then she looked at Kemir and gulped it down.
Tell me what you know about the alchemists.
'You're a bastard.' He was feeling faint. Snow reached into the fire again.
I already know where to find them.
'You give me some food and I'll tell you what I know.' When you hands are healed, do you
still mean to run away from me?
He had no answer to that. A few minutes later she flicked her
tail through the flames. Half a smouldering ribcage landed at his feet. He looked at it for a
second and then tore into it, ignoring the pain from his hands. It was charcoal on the outside
and raw in the middle, but there were plenty of bits in between. Blood dribbled down his chin.
It was delicious.
After the first few mouthfuls, he stopped. He'd been hungry enough times before to take his
time. 'Do you remember when you killed your first alchemist? I was there.'
I know.
'That was the second alchemist I ever met.' He laughed, sucking juices from his fingers.
'Sollos was going to be an alchemist. That's how he got his name. They were going to take
him to the City of Dragons and sell him to the Order and live like kings for the rest of their
lives. Or that's what they thought.'
Why is that so foolish?

Kemir shook his head and chuckled at the madness of the idea. 'Dragon, we were outsiders.
We had no idea where the City of Dragons even was. Someone had come back from
somewhere with a story they'd heard from someone else who'd once been to somewhere that
might have once been visited by a trader who might have been to the City of Dragons at one
time in his life. They thought that all they had to do was go there and hand Sollos over and the
Order would turn him into a great magician and shower them with gold. Daft.' He took a deep
breath and licked his lips. 'When I told that story to the first alchemist I ever met, he nearly
gave himself a rupture he laughed so much. But then again he was already a long way into his
cups.' He shook himself, serious for a moment. 'Dragon, where I came from, we barely knew
where to find the next village. It's true that the Order pay for children. They give them some
sort of test to find out how good an alchemist they might become. If the child is good enough,
the Order buys them. Ten gold dragons. For most people, that's a small fortune. That's enough
to buy an inn or a smithy if you're not too choosy.'
I don't understand. Why do they buy children? Can they not make their own?
'Why don't you ask the next one instead of eating him?' Perhaps I shall. Phis is not interesting.
Tell me something different about alchemists.
'Hmm.' The piece of meat was cooling now. He picked it up and tossed it back towards Snow.
'Needs some more cooking that bit. Pass me another.'
This time, when Snow threw him one back leg, he started carving it apart with his knife,
scraping off the charcoal, slicing out the near-raw fillets underneath. Doing a proper job.
'The first alchemist I met was in a brothel. I was in a bit of a bad way, but Sollos had heard of
him. He took me in and put me back together. He wasn't a proper alchemist though. He was
one of the ones who wasn't quite good enough. Or that's how he put it. You see, they do buy
children and maybe they make some of their own too, and they school them for ten years,
which is longer than any king or queen by the way. The ones who aren't clever enough by
then they make into Scales. You remember those? You had one once. Kailin. You ate him.'
Snow didn't answer and her thoughts were her own. After a good long pause Kemir went on.
'Scales are freaks even before the Hatchling Disease starts turning them into living statues. I
don't know whether the alchemists do something to them or whether after ten years they're
just like that on their own. The ones they don't make into Scales they make into apprentices.
Those are the ones who start to learn all the juicy secrets. Except even then they don't. Ten
more years as an apprentice and even then half of them still get sent away, like the one I met.
He was a sort of half-alchemist, I suppose. He didn't know much, or if he did, he was sharp
enough to keep it to himself even when he was so drunk he couldn't pull up his trousers. They
wander about the realms, travelling tinkers and traders. Every now and then the Order pays
them for a favour. You know what he said pissed him off the most? He didn't know who his
father was, nor his mother. Order wouldn't tell him, or else they didn't know. Likely as not
they'd long spent what they got for selling him and were poor as shit again, and he didn't
know who they were. Poor bastard.' He paused, lost in memory. 'No family. Never even knew
them. That's bad.'
Is that it? That's what you know? That seems unlikely to be useful.
Kemir shrugged. 'What were you hoping for? I know the routes the alchemists take to deliver
their potions, but that's no great secret. Just watch for wagons escorted by a legion ol
Adamantine Men
coming down the Evenspire Road.' He snorted. 'Except with you around they'll probably take
to flying everything on dragon-back.'
That is much more the sort of information I desire. Your other memories are not interesting.
'That's very kind, dragon. Why don't you piss off?'

Eat, Kemir. She tossed him another hunk of roasted cow carcass. She didn't say anything, but
when he was done, when he'd filled his belly so he could hardly move and had stripped away
as much of the meat as would keep, she studied him.
The one that was here before is here again, she told him. The boy you called nest-mate. The
one you said that I should not eat. Do you still wish me to leave?
Kemir glowered. 'Read my mind, dragon.'
He waited until she got the message and thundered into the moonlit sky. When she was gone
he put some of the meat he'd saved onto the ground near the trees and backed away.
'You can come out!' he shouted. 'Dragon's gone now. I don't want to hurt you. You must be
hungry. You can share our food.'
He waited, watching, but the boy didn't come out. And I can hardly blame him for that, can I?
We came out of nowhere, ate his family and destroyed his home. I know exactly how he feels.
He left the meat where it was and sat watching in secret for a while longer. When the boy still
didn't come he settled down beside the fire and closed his eyes. He waited, eyes drooping but
not quite shut. An empty belly and the smell of roasted fat brought you here, but I know
what's on your mind.
The boy didn't disappoint him. He waited a good long time before he came, until Kemir had
been pretending to snore for so long that his throat was sore. He came out of the trees with a
heavy stick ready in his hand and didn't even glance at the meat left out for him. Kemir
watched him come through lidded eyes, slow and purposeful. Good lad. Got your priorities
right. Got a good idea what you're doing too. A knife would be better, but where would you
get one of those out here, eh? The boy was slow and careful with each step. If he was scared,
he didn't show it. He reached Kemir and raised the stick and only then hesitated. Well, what's
it to be? Are you still a boy? Or are you a man?
The stick came down. The blow wasn't the best, and certainly
wouldn't have killed him. Still, it was a good try and Kemir smiled as he caught the stick and
held on to it. He gave the stick a good tug, and then when the boy pulled back, he let go. The
boy tumbled over backwards. Kemir jumped on him, making sure he had no chance to get up.
'I don't want to fight with you, lad. What's your name?'
The boy screamed something incoherent and spat at him.
'I'm not going to hurt you.' Carefully he let the boy go. The boy jumped to his feet, grabbed
his stick and backed away. Then he came at Kemir, who caught the first couple of blows on
his forearms, wincing at the pain from the burns still healing under his sleeves. On the third
one, he ducked aside and kicked the boy's legs out from under him.
'I could show you how to fight, if you like.'
The boy screamed again, turned and ran. When he saw Kemir wasn't following, he stopped
long enough to grab a piece of meat and then vanished into the trees. Kemir shrugged and
settled with his back to the fire to watch.
'I was older than you when the riders came,' he called out. 'Not by many years, but enough to
make a difference. You listen to this, boy! We were on the edge of a lake. Just like this. We
even had a few animals. We thought the dragon-riders would never find us. Even if they did,
we thought they'd leave us alone. Just like this place here.
'Are you still there, boy? Are you listening?' He raised his voice, then slumped back to the
ground and shook his head and his voice dropped. No. Of course he wasn't. There wasn't
anyone here to listen to him at all. Except the stars. There were always stars, or else the moon
or sometimes some clouds when he needed an ear. 'We all ran into the trees, when the dragons
came. They filled the ground we'd cleared by the edge of the lake. They caught a few of us,
but they didn't burn anything or kill anyone. They had riders who said that we belonged to the
King of the Crags. That we had to give them everything they asked for as a tribute. As
payment for their protection. They wanted what they always want. Men to sell as slaves and

women for ... Well, you'll know all about that in time. The older men decided we'd give them
what they wanted. We should have fought, that's what 1 said. I wasn't the only one
either, but what did I know? I was barely a man, like you, all full of piss and vinegar.
Anyway, you've seen one. Think about it, boy. How do you fight a dragon?'
He sighed. He didn't know who he was talking to. The trees and the water. The dead, perhaps.
Certainly not the boy in the woods, who was surely long gone. 'A few of us left then. Just
upped and went. The clever ones. They were gone whe'n the dragons came back a few days
later, with their wooden slave cages. We gave up our own people. There were boys and girls,
tied up by their own weeping mothers and fathers to be sold to the dragon-riders. That's how it
was, boy. There were fights. People killed by their own families. We never had that before.
They chose us by lots. Ten young men and ten girls between the ages of ten and sixteen. I was
one of the ones who should have gone. I ran away and hid for days and they didn't find me.
Someone else went in my place. I knew him. Everyone knew everyone. He was family, of a
sort. A friend. I hated everyone. I wasn't alone. People who lost their sons and daughters and
brothers and sisters held grudges against those who didn't. The boy who was taken because I'd
hidden had a brother. He came for me with a knife. I laid him out with a stick. I didn't want to
kill him, but he wouldn't stop. He came after me again and again. I think he wanted me to kill
him.' Kemir sniffed and blinked and was surprised to find tears in his eyes. He wasn't talking
to anyone except himself now. He could barely see the trees any more. All he could see was
the memory, the burning. His voice broke to a whisper. 'Took me a long time before I
understood how he must have felt. Took a dragon to teach me that.
'The riders took our hearts, all of them. We were empty shells. No one laughed any more.' He
blinked. 'And then they came back for the last time. Me and Sollos were on the other side of
the lake when they came. By the time we got back, it was all gone. Nothing but ash. They
didn't take slaves this time. They didn't take anything. After they'd burned it all, they landed.
Anyone they hadn't killed with fire they put to the sword. They weren't the same riders as had
come before. I could see that by their dragons. Different, you see. And you know what, boy?
For all the oaths I swore that day, maybe those riders were the merciful ones. They put us out
of our misery.' He gave a bitter laugh. 'That was Prince Valmeyan.
He was a king by the time I knew his name. I swore I'd destroy him for what he'd done. Him
and every one of his riders. I never had any idea how, but I want to see him burn. I still do.
Slowly, as he looks out over the ashes of everything he loves. See, boy, I know how you feel.
Sollos and I, we learned to be soldiers so we could fight. I was always good with a bow. We
set about killing riders. Murdered a couple and then we had to run to the furthest corner of the
realms. Out to the moors in the east. After that we took work as we could get it. Killing work,
if you get my drift. It was easier that way but I'm glad it's stopped. I never liked it. Not the
killing, you understand. That was fine. It was the taking orders from them.'
Kemir sniffed. He shifted, settling himself. The boy hadn't come back. He was glad of that.
There were still tears on his cheeks when there shouldn't have been. Best the boy didn't see
that. was all so long ago.
'Sollos is gone now,' he whispered to the air, and suddenly he didn't care whether the boy
came back or not.
Let him crack my skull while I'm sleeping. Then Snow can eat me. Most likely we'd both be
better off. He lay down. I know what you're thinking, boy, because I thought it too. And I
know where that took me, and I know exactly what it's like to be me, and it's really not worth
it. That's what I'm trying to tell you, boy. That's what I'm trying to tell you. Be someone else.
Let it go. He fell asleep, but he didn't sleep well. His dreams were old and troubled.
After you burned a man's home to charcoal and his family to ash, you could hardly bring them
back and pretend it never happened. Let it go? He didn't even know how to begin. You
couldn't really even say sorry. By then that was just was an insult.

26

Jeiros
Jeiros, acting grand master, leaned back in his chair and sighed. On his desk he had six letters.
The ink was still fresh and drying. Three letters were to three sisters, all saying the same
thing: You are now a queen. The other three were to their eyrie-masters, carrying the
necessary instructions. Instructions to pass on the mysteries that only kings and queens were
permitted to know. And a warning about one or two other things.
'I don't know how you manage,' he said. The other alchemist in the room, who'd written the
letters to the eyrie-masters, was Vioros. As Zafir's senior alchemist, he was the closest thing
Jeiros had to a deputy. At least, he was the closest thing that could be found at midday in the
approximate vicinity of the Adamantine Palace when one king, one queen and one prince had
all wound up dead on the same day. 'Bellepheros once wrote two of these in one month, and
we never heard the end of it. But three! And in a day! How have you survived such a
mistress?'
Vioros stuck out his bottom lip and shrugged. 'Her mother was never any trouble to us and nor
has Zafir been, since she took the crown. And not all of these letters are actually necessary,
Jeiros. Jehal isn't dead yet.'
'Yet being the significant word.' Jeiros carefully took a handful of down and sprinkled it over
the drying ink. 'I'll be surprised if he lasts the night. And if he does, he won't last the week.
The wound has gone bad and he's lost so much blood. That's that, I'm afraid. The end of him.
Nothing any of us can do.' Jeiros yawned. 'If he's strong then he'll linger a while. But you're
right: strictly, he's not actually dead yet. The speaker's choices are to let him waste away in
stinking rotting agony for a few days or put him out of his misery. The latter would be the
merciful thing to do, but I suppose she might baulk at that under the circumstances. Besides,
I'm not sure she's one for mercy, is she?'
Vioros glanced sharply up. 'Or she could find herself a blood-mage.'
'Or that.' For a few moments neither of them said anything, as though Vioros had suddenly let
a bad smell into the room and they were both waiting for the air to clear.
'I don't know why Zafir has me trying to keep him alive anyway,' muttered Jeiros at last. 'Why
bother to go to all that trouble and then cut off his head anyway?'
'Oh, I don't think she wants him dead.'
Jeiros sighed again and shook his head. 'Madness. I didn't want to be grand master.' 'You're
not.'
'Oh, come on! Bellepheros disappeared almost half a year ago. If he's not dead, he's certainly
not coming back!' Jeiros rubbed his eyes and waved at the letters. 'I was much happier at the
redoubt. And Bellepheros never had to deal with anything like this. A quarter of the Order
dead at the hands of a rogue dragon; all our stocks wiped out; eyries across the realms running
short. Do you realise that King Narghon is down to two weeks' supply?'
'We're down to three weeks ourselves.'
'I know! Can you imagine?' Jeiros wrung his hands and shook his head. 'Can you simply
imagine what would happen if even one eyrie ran out? An entire eyrie. We'd have to poison
them all! And then the consequences ...'
'I'm trying not to think about it. These Red Riders—'
'If you think that's bad, imagine us at war! All our supplies pass through King Valgar's realm.'
He checked himself. 'Queen Almiri's realm, I mean. Now.'
'That will be Zafir's cause for war, when it comes. I'll make you a wager on that if you like.'

'Make me a wager on how long it will be before Almiri turns on the Order and starts trying to
starve Zafir's eyries. The Red Riders have already started.' He shook his head again.
'Madness, all of it.'
'She'll starve everyone else as well. Even herself.'
Jeiros got up and walked to the window. Outside, the sun was close to the horizon. They've
probably finished building the cages now. Shezira and Valgar will be hanging outside the
gates. What's left of them.
'I don't think she's going to have much of a choice. Or she may not care. If she's got half her
mother's stubbornness ... Have you met her?'
'No.'
'Pity.' He was pacing back and forth now, unable to contain the nervous energy crackling
through his limbs. 'I can't take any chances, Vioros, and neither can you. If the potions run out
among the Adamantine eyries, who do you serve? Zafir or the Order?'
'I serve the Order.'
'Of course you do, of course you do. If the speaker goes to war, we shall stop supplying and
stockpile at the redoubt instead. We simply can't afford to lose any more. I shall tell the
speaker. I'll have to tell the other master alchemists too. Warn them. I suppose I'll have to tell
all the eyrie-masters that they might have to fly to Valeford and pick up their potions from
there. Make sure your alchemists are ready to do what needs to be done if it comes to the
worst. Make sure they've got plenty of what they'll need. Ancestors! I know we've put down
dragons before, but has anyone ever put down an entire eyrie of them? I don't think they have!
How soon could you be prepared here? I mean if you had to be? If it had to be done?'
'A matter of days.'
'You realise that everyone will try to stop you. You won't only have the speaker's riders and
servants and probably half the Scales against you, you'll have the Adamantine Guard to
contend with as well.'
'They rarely pay much attention.'
'So be it. I shall come for an inspection of the Adamantine eyrie before the week is out. Now
to warn the others.' Vioros groaned. 'More letters?' 'More letters.'
Jeiros was halfway through writing the first when a violent knocking shook the door. He
jumped, startled by the sudden sound. He looked at the letter. His hand had twitched in the
middle of a stroke and the word was ruined. He'd have to start again.
'Who is it and what do you want?' he snapped. No one ought to be banging on his door. The
juniors in the order were permitted a
timid knock and the speaker wouldn't bother; she'd simply barge in.
The banging came again. With a growl of irritation, Jeiros got up. He opened the door.
'Tassan.' He blinked, taken aback. He couldn't remember the last time he'd seen the Night
Watchman here. Usually they avoided each other, following some ancient unwritten law that
the Order and Adamantine Men simply didn't get along.
Apart from a few nights ago. But then these weren't usual times.
'Acting Grand Master.' Vale Tassan bowed politely. He got my title right, Jeiros noticed. A
little too much accent on the Acting though.
'We are extremely busy, thanks largely to you, so I would appreciate it if you were brief.'
Jeiros didn't move aside. He certainly didn't want the Night Watchman seeing the letters on
the desk.
'I have two things on my mind.' Vale stepped forward. Jeiros still didn't move. The Night
Watchman cocked his head. 'May I come in or shall we discuss my business out here where
anyone might overhear us. Both my matters are somewhat sensitive.'
Jeiros glanced over his shoulder. Vioros had already cleared the desk. With a sharp nod,
Jeiros moved aside.

'I shan't ask what you were writing,' said Vale. 'I'm sure it's not my business.'
'We've been writing all day, Night Watchman. You made three new queens today.'
Tassan smiled. 'Two. Jehal's not dead yet.'
'That is merely a matter of time, Night Watchman.'
'I am not so sure of that.' Vale sat down in the chair Vioros had vacated. Somehow that only
emphasised how massive the man was. He could probably rip me apart with his bare hands.
'Well I am quite sure,' snapped Jeiros. Something about the Adamantine Man was rubbing
him the wrong way. Maybe I'm just tired. Or maybe he should have done something weeks
ago. Or maybe I simply blame him for wielding the sword. He said it himself: 'The Guard
obeys orders. From birth to death. Nothing more, nothing less.' Is that really all he is?
'I'm sure you know best.' Said in the tone of voice of someone quite sure that Jeiros didn't
know best.
'Night Watchman, we have a very great deal to do thanks to your work today, so I would
appreciate it if you got to the point. What can I do for you?'
'All right, I'll be blunt then. There's a war coming. Let's start with that.'
Jeiros felt insulted. 'You think I'm blind? I seem to remember coming to you for some help in
stopping it.'
Vale shrugged. 'So many eyes seem to be screwed wilfully shut these days. Since you've seen
it coming, I'm sure you'll be well prepared to support the speaker's dragons in whatever may
come. I am, of course, at your disposal if you need any help. In securing the supply of potions
to the speaker's eyries, for example.'
'I see.' Had he been listening at the door? No, he couldn't have been; it was a very thick door,
and for precisely the reason that Bellepheros hadn't wanted anyone pressing their ear against it
and finding out things that they shouldn't. So what then? Or is he simply cleverer than I
thought? Jeiros' thoughts grew petulant. But if he's that clever then he can bloody well do
something about keeping this from getting completely out of hand. 'Then I am grateful to you
for your offer. The threat of the Red Riders is a real one and I shall examine what you might
do to be of assistance. You might encourage the speaker to use her dragons to supply the
eyries of the realms with our potions, perhaps.' As if that's going to happen.
'The speaker does not listen to me.'
Jeiros gave an unsympathetic shrug. 'And the second matter?' Was that regret I saw there,
Night Watchman?
'The second is a little more ... awkward.' For a moment the Night Watchman seemed unsure of
himself, something Jeiros had never thought he'd see. 'When Speaker Hyram died, did you
examine his body?'
Jeiros shook is head. Why is he asking me this? 'No. We were not asked to do so.'
'Do you have to be asked?'
'Unless there is some reason for suspicion, yes.'
Vale smiled thinly. 'And Hyram falling off a balcony did not strike you as a matter of
suspicion?'
'Obviously so, but a hundred of your men came forward to say
that Shezira had been with Hyram when he fell. What was there to question? He was pushed.'
'What if he wasn't pushed? What if he fell?'
Jeiros had to laugh at that. 'You're asking me? I thought that was quite impossible.'
'What if I was wrong?'
'Then the council of kings and queens has made a terrible mistake, Night Watchman, and so
have you.' He watched Vale's face harden, his lips pinch together. He means it: he really
doubts. This could be an opportunity ... 'And the rest of us,' he added. 'We could not have
known though, even if we had examined the body. We could have said which of his injuries
had killed him, and whether he'd received them from the fall or whether he'd received them

before he fell. But we could not have said whether he fell or was pushed, nor if he was
pushed, whose hand was guilty. We are alchemists, Night Watchman, not magicians.' Which
was mostly true. Mostly.
'You might have known if he had been poisoned.'
'We might, that is true.' Jeiros frowned. 'Do you have reason to suspect such a thing?' And, if
so, why bring it up now when you've just executed someone for his murder? Where are you
going with this?
'No.' Vale shook his head and stood up. 'No real reason. It was only a thought.' He walked to
the door. 'Thank you for your time, Acting Grand Master. Do think about how my soldiers
might best help you to ensure a steady supply of your potions to the speaker's eyries in the
times to come.'
The Night Watchman left. The door closed behind him with a soft click. Jeiros and Vioros
looked at one another.
'After all that, what does he want?' asked Vioros.
'Nothing good,' sniffed Jeiros. 'I think he wanted to let us know that no one is safe.' He looked
Vioros in the eye and smiled mirthlessly. 'Do you want some more good news? Something
else no one will have told you? You know that I've been counting dragons, trying to find out
whether we're still missing one?'
Vioros rolled his eyes. 'I do apologise for that. I've been dropping hints where I can that
counting dragons is not the way ...'
Jeiros couldn't help himself. He started to laugh, then struggled to get himseli under control.
'I'm sorry, old friend. Very rude
of me. But counting dragons has been more informative than I thought. Did you know that,
for the last three months, the number of hatchlings that won't take has doubled? They're
putting down dragons every week in most eyries. Most of the dragon-kings don't even know
yet.' He glanced at the letters on his desk. 'Nor our soon-to-be-queens either, but the eyriemasters do. Across the realms our eyries are still hatching as many good dragons as they used
to. But I've had letters back from every eyrie-master now and they all say the same. The
number of hatchlings that refuse to eat has almost doubled. Just like that, and they'd like to
know why. They'd like to know what's happening. You can understand why they are nervous,
with their dragon production rates at risk.' Jeiros shook his head in disbelief.
'And do we know what is happening?' Vioros raised an eyebrow.
'Yes, of course we do. And it is not what is happening, it is what has happened, and it is
certainly not good. But beside our current difficulties that's by the by. The rogue dragon is
definitely alive.'
'It is?'
'Unquestionably.'
'And you found this out through accountancy? I'm impressed.' For a moment, Vioros looked
truly amazed. Jeiros hesitated, savouring the moment before he ruined it.
'No, I'm afraid not. It's rather more straightforward. Reports have reached me from
Valmeyan's eyries. It was seen two months ago. It's been burning things.'
'Are we sure it was the rogue?'
'Yes, quite sure.' Jeiros shook his head and sat heavily back behind his desk. 'There aren't any
other white dragons and there were rather a lot of witnesses, I'm afraid.'

27

Useful Food
Kemir left the boat carefully tied by the lake shore in case the boy came back. He was
probably dead. If he wasn't yet, most likely he would be soon. But that can't be my problem. I
didn't do this. The dragon did it.
You keep telling yourself that, shot back another inner voice. You just keep telling yourself
that.
He left some food as well. What was left of the cow. The meat was starting to turn but it was
all he had. Snow watched him at his work. He could feel her curiosity.
Why are you are leaving food for someone who tried to kill you?
Kemir snarled, 'Because I'm a man, not a dragon. But how would you understand?' She was at
her most frightening when she was like this. She would sit on her haunches, wings folded, tail
curled around in front of her, absolutely still. She'd watch in silence until Kemir forgot that
she was there. Then he'd turn around, and there she was, looming thirty feet over him, blotting
out the sky. Just watching. Or else she'd idly stretch her wings and cast what felt like half the
world into shadow for a few seconds.
Do you want to leave this food too? She dropped half a donkey onto the ground. There were
the remains of some kind of harness around the donkey's head. It clearly hadn't been minding
its own business wild in a field somewhere when Snow had taken it.
'I don't think he'll want it raw.' He couldn't help thinking about where the donkey had come
from.
Snow gave the dead donkey a pensive look, then she ambled on all fours over to the shore of
the lake. She picked up a few stones, some of them roughly the same size as Kemir, and built
a ring. Then she gathered some more stones and piled them on top. And then she breathed fire
on them.
Kemir took a hurried step away as flames washed over the
ground around the stones. Snow didn't stop. She didn't even pause for breath. The fire just
went on and on and on.
After a bit the heat was too much and he had to walk right away into the trees. She was still at
it a minute later, the flames pouring out of her. Made him wonder how long she could keep it
up before she ran out of breath ...
We do not need to breathe, Kemir. It is a ... He felt her rummaging in his head for the word. A
habit. An instinct. It is not a necessity.
Which explained how she'd vanished into a lake for five days. He shuddered. Everything
breathed. Everything.
Eventually Snow stopped. She kicked off the stones from the top, gingerly, as though even
she could feel how hot they were. Then she slit the donkey open from end to end and shook
out all its guts into the first ring of stones. She put one hot stone into the cavity that had been
the donkey's chest, then put the carcass on top of its guts and piled the rest of the stones back
on top.
Will that be better?
One moment you do that. And the next moment you'll eat him. Or me. 'Since when do
dragons do cooking?' he asked, when he couldn't think of anything else.
My ... There was a strange tone to her thoughts. Something wistful, winsome, almost
awestruck. My first mistress showed this to me. When we thought the world was ending and
there was nothing left to be done. Sasya.
Kemir raised an eyebrow. 'You had a mistress?'

A moon-sorceress. The ones who created us. They are long gone. He felt her push the
memories out of her thoughts. I found a road. I have not seen this ... He felt her plucking the
word out of his head again. I have not seen a donkey creature before. I was hungry, but I only
ate things with four legs. Kemir thought he sensed a hint of reproach. These are ... They taste
like horse but sweeter. I like them better.
Kemir slowly came closer again. 'Everything with two legs ran away screaming, then?'
Some of them fell over where they stood and clutched their heads. I do not remember so much
fear in your kind. One of them decided to die. He was old.
'What do you mean decided to die? You mean you scared him to death?'
I did not try to. I was hungry. I left your hind alone. I took as many things with four legs as I
needed. 'Donkeys?'
Other things too. Horses and dogs and buffalo. I did not even burn their wagons, Kemir.
'I get it, dragon. You were very very careful not to hurt any people. Some of them died
anyway, but that really wasn't your fault.' He spat and turned away. 'You still ate Nadira.'
Snow peered at him. Her face had the same hungry expression as it ever did but her thoughts
had changed. There was a music in them. She was laughing at him.
1 see into your mind, Kemir. You think you can be different from others of your kind. You
think the young one we leave behind us could be different too, if only we could find him and
take him with us. But we cannot do that if he will not come, and besides, you are fooling
yourself. I do not understand why you try to change how things are, Kemir. I am a dragon.
Some of us are white and some are black; some are larger and others are smaller; but beneath
our scales we are all simply dragons. Your kind are the same, Kemir. All of you. You always
fight one another and you always will. I remember more than you can imagine. I remember
from long ago, before the world was broken. Your kind were always this way even then, and
you, Kemir, are no different. I can see into you and I know this to be true. Embrace what you
are, Kemir. Do not try to be something else. Your enemies are merely those with bigger
armies and sharper swords. That is the only difference between you.
Kemir bit his lip. 'My enemies have dragons. Dragons are not weapons.'
No, Kemir, that is exactly what we are. But not for you. You are food. The order of things has
become twisted. 'I am not food, damn you!'
Snow didn't answer. She was laughing at him again. You amuse me. Perhaps that will save
you when I become hungry.
'Oh, I'm amusing food now, am I? Just when I thought useful couldn't get any worse.' He took
a deep breath. 'If there was a road and it was busy then there must have been a town not far
away.'
You are thinking of the boy again.
'Some things can't be undone and some things can never be
forgiven. What you did to him can't be put right. Nor can what you did to Nadira. But you
could try.'
Snow was looking at him. Kemir felt her puzzlement.
Why?
'Forgiveness.'
Forgiveness, Kemir? I do not understand this. In your mind, it seems it is the opposite of
revenge. I see revenge in you often. All of your kind. You, Kemir, you would rather die trying
and failing to have revenge than live and forgive. Why would you do that? I do not
understand either forgiveness or revenge.
Kemir laughed. 'Yet that's what drives you too.'
No, Kemir. I seek to free my kind from their slavery. I do not seek to wilfully punish those
who did it to us. I will do what needs to be done, no more. I will eat when I am hungry,
Kemir, or perhaps for pleasure. But not for spite.

'Some people think that forgiveness is the most beautiful thing in the world. And you can't
have that unless you have a little revenge too.'
I see nothing beautiful in being stupid. She cocked her head. I see, however, that you want
this forgiveness very much. Why?
His fists were clenched. He hadn't noticed, but now they were so tight that it hurt. Why
indeed? 'Because I should have stopped you. I should have stopped you from eating the
people that lived here. I should have stopped you from eating Nadira.'
Ah. I see.
Very slowly Snow lowered her head until she held it just above the ground. She moved closer,
right in front of him. So close that he could reach out and ...
Touch me, Kemir.
His heart was racing. She was warm. He could feel her heat. And she was huge. He reached
out a hand and touched the scales of her nose. He was shaking, he realised, like a leaf.
When the snows melt on the tops of the mountains and the melt-water rushes down their sides
and the rivers bloat and swell and froth, who will stop the flood? She growled and withdrew.
Foolish man. When the flood comes, you run. When mountains topple, you run. When the
earth cracks, you run. So it is when a dragon comes. Unless you are Kemir, who wrings his
hands and says 'I should have stopped you.'
For a moment the fear went away. Kemir walked past Snow's head to where her front claws
sank into the soft ground. He kicked her as hard as he could. Not that she'd even feel it, but it
was satisfying, kicking a dragon. 'Fine. Leave the boy. Just take me to the town you saw.
We'll find out where we are. And don't burn it. The food there is all useful food, remember,
and besides, I might want to stay there. You can find out where Valmeyan and his dragons are
and then you can start burning things again.'
As you wish, Kemir. I am no longer hungry today.
'And I will not be afraid of you.'
Perhaps I have taught you something of value then.
'And stop laughing at me.'
He put the boy out of his mind as best he could and climbed onto Snow's back. She lumbered
across the ground to the edge of the clearing she'd made in the forest and then started to run.
Kemir closed his eyes. This was the bit that always scared him the most. The dragon's whole
body pulsed with every step. The earth shook and the trees quivered in sympathy. He felt like
a little boat, tossed on the waves of a stormy sea, hurled this way and that, at the mercy of the
dragon-rider harness they'd stolen months ago, which didn't even fit properly. As Snow
reached the edge of the water, she made one last effort. Kemir felt himself grow heavy and
then they were flying, over the water, tossing spray everywhere. Each beat of Snow's wings
levered her upward, pressing him into her scales. She circled once and then put her back
towards the morning sun. Below them, all Kemir could see was endless forest and the silver
ribbon of a river flowing idly away from the lake.
Maybe she's right. How do you stop a hungry dragon, after all? But the thought felt hollow.
Somehow. That was the answer. You didn't just give up and say it couldn't be done. Of that
much he was sure.
After an hour of following the river, they began to see cleared spaces in the forest. Then
something that might have been a boat on the river. Then a village, more fields, more boats,
all dotted about like tiny little toys. Which made him remember playing dragon-lords with his
cousin Sollos when they'd been little boys. They'd make mounds in the dirt and find little
stones to be people and then they'd pretend they were dragons and smash it all to pieces.
Well now he knew how those little stones felt. He wondered what they thought, the little
people on the ground below him now, when they looked up and saw a dragon. Did a chill run
down their spines? Were they frozen to the spot, wondering if today was the day the monster

would swoop down and snatch them in its jaws? Or did they shrug their shoulders, mutter
'There goes another one' to their neighbours and get on with what they were doing? As if
dragons were just another kind of weather.
Snow banked and pitched down, swooping low over the next village. As she dived, Kemir
couldn't hear anything except the rush of the wind past his face, but when he craned his neck
over Snow's shoulder, he saw the people. A few were staring, rooted to the spot, but most
were running away. They were running ahead of Snow, out into their fields. He couldn't hear
them screaming, but he knew that they were.
Well that answers that, then. 'Why do people always run in front of whatever is chasing
them?' he shouted. 'Why don't they scatter?' And why am I shouting? No one can hear me
over this wind and the dragon doesn't need to anyway.
All food runs, thought Snow. She felt smug. Pleased at the reaction below.
'They are not food!'
Everything that runs is food. Kemir felt a hunger in the dragon now, almost a craving. He
could picture her crashing into the village, spraying fire, smashing houses into splinters,
tossing screaming men and women up into the air for the sheer joy of it, just like he and
Sollos had done in their games. The visions lasted for a while, long after Snow had left the
village behind and risen back into the sky. He shuddered. They weren't his own visions, he
was fairly sure of that. They had far too vicious a joy to them.
Other villages came and went, scattered patches of open space amid the great blanket of trees.
Then the forest began to break up. There were more people, more fields jigsawed together,
more roads, more boats on the river, and then finally a town. Kemir wasn't sure what he'd
expected — probably a muddy collection of houses, little more than a village that had
sprawled out of control. What he hadn't expected was a small city- It straddled the river,
with strong stone walls protecting both halves. It even had a little castle. Snow changed
course, keeping her distance.
'Are there dragons here?' That was his first thought.
No. If there were, I would have freed them. Snow started to descend. We will fly further until
we find some.
'Or you could let them know that you're here. Burn some fields, eat some cows, that sort of
thing. Donkeys, if you think they taste better. Scare them. Do whatever you want to do. Make
noise. Let them see you. Enough to draw a few riders from their eyries to come have a look.
Then when they come, you eat them.' Slowly. Crunch crunch. Like chewing on an icicle.
Like Ash.
'Yes. Like Ash. Don't hunt them where they're strong. Draw the other dragons to you.'
Snow thought for a while. Will there be fighting men in this town?
'It's a castle, Snow. Castles have soldiers. There's really not much point if they don't.'
Then they will have weapons for fighting dragons and the people who ride on us. Kemir could
feel her weighing up choices. She turned and headed away from the town.
'What are you doing, dragon? Are you afraid?'
No. She was laughing. I have no need for you while I do this, but you are still useful and I do
not want you to be dead. I will do as you suggest. I will burn this place. You may watch from
far away. It will be safer.
'No! No burning! No need to kill anyone, Snow. You understand me? Just scare them and
then leave. Useful food, remember.'
I understand, Kemir, but I will decide for myself which of you are useful.
She didn't say anything more, but landed on a hilltop a good few miles from the town and
waited until Kemir unstrapped himself and got down. He could have stayed, he supposed.
Could have stayed in the saddle, but what difference would it have made? She could have torn
him out with one twist of her tail, or else simply ignored him. So he shuddered as Snow

launched herself into the sky again. He was very glad, he decided, that he was where he was.
On the ground, far away from where Snow was going.

28

Poison in the Blood
Jehal was dying. He knew he was. The pain was getting worse. He grew slowly weaker until
he didn't know he could possibly be any weaker and yet the next time he awoke, he was. The
smell was bad too.
In some ways he was surprised he was alive at all. He'd lost a dreadful lot of blood. He felt
perpetually light-headed, which was probably a mercy. And yet, when he hadn't died, he'd felt
a joyous spark of hope. For few days he'd thought he might even heal. And then came the
smell.
He'd seen men take a wound in a tournament and die, just like this, surrounded by the stench
of their own rotting. The alchemists hadn't been able to help them and Jehal had little hope
they would be able to help him.
If they cared.
He had a dim memory that Zafir might have come to him the day after Shezira had shot him.
She'd held his hand and said some soft words that might have seemed comforting at the time.
Or maybe she hadn't. Maybe she was a dream like all the other dreams. Mostly he dreamed of
Lystra and of the son he would never see. If my bloodline dies, so does yours. Neatly done,
Queen Shezira. If it wasn't me you'd crippled, I would applaud you for such an efficient and
ruthless revenge. But you messed up. I'm dying, and now all that's left is to mock us both for
your incompetence. What use am I dead? How do I protect them?
He got angry sometimes, which was always a mistake because he didn't have the energy to be
angry. He'd rail and spit at the world and then he'd fade away and wake up hours later to find
that even more of his strength had ebbed away. Men and women came and went from his
bedside, silent frightened ghosts who looked at him and then looked away. Afraid. As if they
were the ones who were
slowly dying in the gilded prison that was the Tower of Dusk.
Sometimes he thought about his own father, cocooned in his sickbed for nearly a decade. This
must have been what you saw, he thought. In the early days. When there was still a part of
you alive in there. Then such a sorrow filled him that he wept.
He thought of Meteroa too. He would understand. Did Shezira know? Did she know what
King Tyan had done to him? My brother butchered my sisters and my mother. My father ...I
don't even know what my father did to my uncle. What a family we are.
I have done such terrible things.
Yes, you have, said another voice. A new voice, but he couldn't see anyone. Not that that
meant anything. He was probably dreaming again. The voice was another fragment of his
slowly shattering self, most likely. Come to remind him of all the things he'd done wrong so
that he could be properly miserable before he finally got around to dying. Come to remind
him of how brother Calzarin came by his murderous madness.
Piss off, he told it, and laughed as best he could. If he couldn't sneer at anyone else, he could
always sneer at himself.
/ could do that if you like, said the voice with a sniff of amusement. Or I could save your life.
You choose.

Then I'll have my life saved, please. Although I suppose I should as^ what it's going to cost
me.
A lot.
Doesn't it always? He hated feeling so weak. He was weak even in his dreams now.
Yes. It usually does, agreed the voice.
So what's it going to be? Are you some part of me that's been hiding away all my miraculous
powers of healing and recovery, waiting for me to agree to a life dedicated to the betterment
of others? Or are you one of the spirits I don't believe in, come to tell me I can have my life
bacf( if I swear to become a good person? Because I'm not sure either is playing to my
strengths.
No. None of that crap. I want your money.
Jehal spluttered. Now I know you're just another part of me. Although I'm a little disappointed
at my apparent lacl^ of imagination. Is that what happens when you die? Do you become dull
first? I must confess that I have largely avoided the' (omjniny of the near dead, but
those I have seen have usually been most tediously dull. Deathly dull, even. Heh.
I want something else as well.
Do try not to bore me.
What I want is not yours to give. One day you'll try to take it and find that I got there first. Let
it go. It's really not that important to you.
Oh, here we go. You know, I've heard this story before. What are we talking about? My soul,
is it? It's usually something like that. Whatever it is, being told it's really not that important to
me rather convinces me that it is, in fact, desperately important to me.
I want the Adamantine Spear.
Oh. For a moment Jehal was nonplussed. So do I.
No, you don't. The other voice huffed impatiently. You want what it means. You want to be
speaker. You don't give a toss about the spear or the ring.
You're much too crotchety to be me. You remind me of my uncle.
Try imagining that I'm a wizard. I'm going to take away the poison in your blood.
Oh, really?
Yes, really. Piss me off when you're better and I can always put it back again.
Jehal tried to laugh. As deathbed visions go, I like you.
We have a agreement?
No.
Oh. Well, I suppose I'll leave you to your lingering death then.
Jehal chuckled, or would have if he could have managed it. The Adamantine Spear? Some old
relic that sat around gathering dust, wheeled out by whoever happened to be high priest of the
Glass Cathedral every ten years. What did he care about that? They could always make
another one. A better one maybe. One that didn't weigh so much for a start. Or he could
simply change his mind. The thought made him want to laugh even more. I'd better not let
myself know what I'm thinking. If I'm going to betray myself later, I'd much rather it came as
a surprise ... He took a deep breath and lay back. He was probably going to die now, he
thought, but at least he'd go out with a smile on his face. Then, as an afterthought, he screwed
up his lace and asked. Whoever you are, you don't happen to count Vale Teuton as a friend,
do you?
The voice seemed to shrug. I don't give a fig for him one way or the other.
That's good. Because if you really aren't just some ghost and you really are going to make me
better, then I think I'm going to have to kill him. In some horribly slow and nasty way.
I'm sure that would be very interesting to watch but sadly I suspect I shall miss the occasion.
Do we have an agreement?
Can you do what you say you can?

Yes. Last chance. Do we have an agreement or not?
We do.
A warmth engulfed Jehal, as though the softest fur blanket in the palace had wrapped itself
around him. He closed his eyes and drifted off to somewhere far away. Somewhere past the
ends of the worlds and off into the void between them, where everything was black and still,
where clocks and hearts beat slower and slower and time didn't march any more ...
And then he was back.
He opened his eyes. The pain was gone. He felt strong again. He tried to sit up and quickly
discovered that the pain being gone and feeling strong were rather fleeting and illusory things.
Still ... still, he did feel a lot better.
He looked to his left and caught a fleeting glimpse of someone in a pale grey shirt dashing out
of the door. The ceiling above him was familiar. He was still in the Tower of Dusk but not in
the Great Hall, where Shezira had almost killed him. He recognised the room. She'd slept here
in the days before the Night of the Knives, when he'd come to see her and played his last card
to force her and Hyram apart.
You might as well stop thinking about either of them. They're both dead, for better or for
worse. Zafir's going to get her war and you might as well get used to it.
The door flew open with a bang. Jehal had to look twice to recognise the face. Jeiros, the
alchemist.
'Prince Jehal! It is truly a miracle!' The alchemist rushed over. He tore off the blanket and
started poking around between Jehal's legs.
'Excuse me!' Jehal was naked, he realised. He supposed he shouldn't be surprised about that.
He tried to lift his head to see
what Jeiros was doing, what damage Shezira had actually done to him, whether any of it was
permanent, but the alchemist had piled the blanket up on his chest and he couldn't see. He was
numb from the waist down and could only vaguely feel the alchemist's prodding. 'I'd prefer if
you didn't do that.'
'The rot has gone. Simply gone! I've never seen anything like it!' Jeiros carefully laid the
blanket back where it Was supposed to be. 'No one will believe this. I have to get Vioros!'
'Master Alchemist!' Jehal's head was spinning. 'I am not an exhibition!' He felt sick. The
alchemist's enthusiasm was overwhelming. 'And I can't feel my legs. I trust they are still
there.'
'Yes yes yes. The wound is filled with Dreamleaf, that's all. You're going to live, Prince Jehal.
Do you understand? Every other man I have ever seen who had a wound like this turn bad has
died. And you're going to live. How? How is that possible?' He came around and leaned over
Jehal's face. His eyes narrowed. 'Yes indeed. How is it possible?'
Jehal closed his eyes. 'I do not know, Master Alchemist. I had a vision. Whether it was real or
a dream I couldn't tell you. Believe me when I say that I'm as surprised as you are to find that
I am mysteriously healed. If it was a miracle then I shall thank Aruch for his prayers and then
go back to ignoring him. If it wasn't, well then I'd like to know what happened at least as
much as you would. Probably more.' He took a deep breath. He had a headache now from so
much talking. Which was annoying. His mouth, as he'd often observed to his lovers, was one
of his best features.
Speaking of which ...
'Master Alchemist!' Jeiros was still nearby. Jehal could feel his presence.
'Prince Jehal? I have to inform the speaker. The danger is largely gone. Healing will take a
long time, but we can help. Now the poison is gone from your blood ...'
Poison in your blood. That's what the voice said ... 'Master Alchemist! Please!' He tried to
raise his head to watch Jeiros more carefully, but the effort was beyond him. 'Before you go,

there is one thing I would rather hear from you than from Zafir when she comes.' Assuming
she's not coming to have me executed along with
everyone else who doesn't bow and scape to her every whim. 'What damage has Queen
Shezira done to me?'
Jeiros hesitated. Jehal counted out the seconds. Quite a lot then. I'm not going to like this.
'Your leg will heal, but I'm afraid you will always limp and it will always be weak. I think in
time you will be able to walk without a staff on which to lean, but I doubt you will ever run
again. I think you'll find riding a horse particularly unpleasant too.'
'And dragons?' You're not telling me something. I can hear it in your voice.
'There may be some discomfort, but no more than at any other time. I'm sure a special harness
could be made if it gives you any trouble.'
Well, that wasn't what you're hiding. Do I really want to thinly about it? But if I don't hear it
now, I'll hear it from Zafir, and that will be worse. 'And?'
'Wait and see, Your Holiness. It may not be as bad as it seems.' Everything in Jeiros' voice
betrayed him.
'Holiness?' Jehal croaked out a laugh. 'I'm not crowned, Master Alchemist. Perhaps I never
will be. Now is that all? A limp and an aversion to horses and feats of athletics I can live with.
Or is there more?'
You should really wait, Your Holiness. It is too early to know—'
'To know what?' He knew. He already knew and it turned him cold inside. He might even
wish he'd died after all. 'What of women? What of that?'
Jeiros sighed. 'I cannot say for sure, Prince Jehal. It will be a long time before you can ...
Well. And there will likely be some pain. At best. For some time to come, at any rate.'
'And what of heirs?'
'It is much too early to say, Your Holiness. I think, once you are healed, you will still perform
as well as you ever did in that particular regard. Until you can be sure, however, I suggest you
take great care of the heir you have.'
Jehal didn't hear the alchemist leave. The numbness had spread right up his spine and down
his arms and into his head.
Take great care of the heir you have. So maybe Shezira got exactly
what she wanted after all. Did he want to be alive like that? He wasn't sure. Perhaps Jeiros
was right and he should wait. The alchemist's voice hadn't held much certainty either way.
Best not to even think about it. If only it was that that easy. But I can think about other things.
Distractions. I owe it to myself to heal. I will heal, and I will be whole again. Yes, and when I
am healed there will be blood, and a great deal of it will come from the Night Watchman.
Think about that. Much more pleasing.

29

A Taste of Happiness
Snow landed in the town. There weren't many places large enough. In fact, there was only
one, right next to the little building that Kemir had called a castle. The space had people in it,
but Snow ignored them. Sure enough, as she swooped out of the sky, they ran screaming,
senseless with panic. The ones who weren't quick enough were crushed or sent flying through
the air as she smashed into the hard-packed dirt. The stupid and the slow. Around her,
rumbles of tumbling stone and several clouds of dust marked where the people of the town

hadn't made their little houses strong enough. Snow swept her head from side to side and
shrieked.
It is habit. It is what we do when we return to our nesting place. It is our way of greeting our
kind. Kemir was far away, but she talked to him as if he was still on her back. She wasn't sure
how useful he really was, but she missed having him with her. She missed the company, the
sharing of thoughts. She missed being part of a nest. It will be good to have other dragons
around me again.
She ate a couple of the people she'd crushed in her landing. Then she shifted back onto her
hind legs, lifted up her head and sent a column of fire into the air.
Let them know that you're here. That is done. It seemed all too easy. Would that really be
enough to make other dragons come? Scare them. That was done too. She could feel the fear
all around her. Make noise. Let them see you.
Do whatever you want to do. Kemir had only the slightest idea of what that would mean.
What she wanted to do was burn the town to ash, slaughter the little things that lived here and
spend a few delicious days hunting down the ones that escaped. The hunting was the best part.
The feelings of her prey when they realised they'd been found. The hopeless despair, the
laughable defiance,
A Taste of Happiness
their pathetic rages, the pitiful pleading and begging. As if she could be swayed ...
/ miss what we once were. When we fought together, all dragons side by side with the silver
riders on our backs and armies that filled the horizon.
No. Burning the town wasn't going to bring back the glory they'd had before the silver men
had broken the world. That would have to wait.
A long pause followed. The realisation slowly settled on her: she'd landed in a place that
didn't have enough space for her to take off again.
Why did I do that? She knew the answer even as she asked herself the question. She'd done
that so that she wouldn't have any choice about smashing up at least a part of the town on her
way out. Except now she didn't want to. Or rather she did, but she'd decided not to. Kemir is
right. We are old and wise in our way, yet we are impatient like children. That is how we
were made. Creatures of impulse and destruction and whim.
She looked at the roads and alleys that led into the town square. They were small and narrow.
Houses pressed around them. They most certainly weren't built for dragons. She was
wondering what she should do and whether it really mattered that much if she knocked a few
buildings out of the way when she picked up a familiar taste among the thoughts around her.
Anger. Fear. Anticipation ...
She knew it was coming. She lurched up into the air. A scorpion bolt slammed into her neck
about a yard from her head. She felt a fierce pinprick of pain, as though she'd been stung. If
she hadn't moved, it might have hit her in the head. It surprised her. In the great war of long
ago, the humans had had nothing like this. They'd had a lot of other things, magics and
devices that could kill, but nothing that could hurt, nothing that stung.
The anger hit her like a wall. She skittered and turned to face the castle. Her tail flicked back
and forth, smashing the houses behind her to bits. She barely noticed. Someone on the castle
had tried to kill her, and now they deserved everything they were about to get. I am sony,
Kemir. I know you will be angry.
Sorry? No, not really, since that implied regret, and dragons
did not understand regret. Maybe she was sorry that Kemir would be sad. Maybe that was it.
She lunged forward, propped her front claws against the castle wall and reared up. Her long
neck arched over the castle walls; slowly and methodically she drenched its innards with fire.
Men screamed and died. Wave after wave of joy rippled through her. Fear my fire, feel my
power, little ones, she told them. You should have fled when I came. She reached up higher

and pushed, trying to forced her way inside the castle walls so she could get at the inner keep.
Stones fell, but the wall held. She backed away as far as she could and hurled herself at it,
crashing into the stone with her side. It still refused to fall.
Now I am ANGRY! Those who should fight hide in caves or now behind ramparts of stone.
So where else shall I spend my wrath? Where else shall I take my pleasure?
Furious, she turned on the town. She rose up again and spewed fire in furious arcs all around
her. Then she crouched and sprang at the widest of the roads, smashing her way through the
cramped and fragile buildings with all the delicacy and care of an avalanche. Houses
splintered and smashed as she barged past them. Dust and smoke swirled around her, pieces
of debris rained in sporadic showers, and then she was at the city walls, clumsily levering
herself over them, head and neck and tail and front claws scrabbling for purchase along the
top in an effort to pull up the bulk of her body. Her wings flapped furiously and with a lurch
she rolled onto the top of the wall and down the other side. Without a pause she was running,
charging through the nearby fields as fast as she could, hauling herself up into the air.
Even as she rose, she was turning, twisting back towards the town. If anything, the fury
burned stronger that it had at the start. This was how it felt to be a dragon.
You will not escape me. Stone will not save you. Not this time.
She scattered fire across the town. Unleashing the flames always felt good. Like mating,
before the alchemists dulled her mind. It left the same hunger inside her too. She would need
to eat when she was done here, and eat well.
Below, amid the smoke and the flames, men and women ran and screamed. Food, all of you.
Nothing but food. She flew around the castle, gave the tower in the middle of the castle a long
blast
and then landed on top of it. Stones crumbled under her claws, almost tipping her off. Such
was her anger that she tried to sink her teeth into the towers. When they didn't give, she
smashed them to pieces with her tail. Every time she tore a new hole in the stone, she poured
fire into the wound.
Finally the stone groaned and rumbled. Half the keep crumbled away and tipped her off in a
shower of broken masonry. She landed on her back and floundered for a few seconds before
she managed to right herself.
Where? How? How do I get to them? They were still alive, some of them. They were buried
in there, out of her reach, but she could feel their thoughts. Raw, hot burning terror to make
her heart sing with joy. Pain too. A lot of pain, but they were alive, and they were supposed to
be dead.
Her anger had become a living thing with a will of its own, as though she carried with her the
spirits of all dragonkind, freed from the dull shells the human alchemists made for them. It is
enough, she tried to tell it. They are probably dying. Even if they are not, they cannot escape.
They are trapped.
No! It is not enough!
But I should leave some to live. That is our plan. Some must live to tell of what has happened.
Then other dragons will come and we will take them to us.
But not these! These tried to kill you! Let us destroy them all. Leave nothing but ash and
rubble. Burn them to dust!
Why? Because they pricked my scales? She paused to pull the scorpion bolt from her neck.
There. It is gone. In a sunrise or two, I will barely remember it.
Because they dared!
She had no answer to that. She smashed and climbed her way back out of the castle. A good
portion of the eastern half of the town was ablaze now. The rest of it was doomed. What could
burn would burn. Stones would crack and split in the heat. People would collapse,

overwhelmed by smoke. Even if she did vent more rage on them, it would make little
difference.
And vengeance is futile, remember. That is what I told Kemir. Dragons do not act out of
kindness. Dragons do not forgive, but nor do dragons avenge, So then what is this desire?
She already knew the answer to that. The anger was fading. The rest was pleasure. Fun. Fun
forgotten for too long to resist. She launched herself back into the air. The western side of the
town, away from the castle, was still intact. She hadn't set fire to even a part of it yet. Already,
people were appearing on the eastern riverbank looking for a way to get across.
It would be so easy to destroy them all. And so satisfying, and yet if I do then what have I
achieved?
She almost left them then, almost turned and climbed into the sky to wait for more dragons to
come, but at the last moment she gave in to her desires and wheeled and dived and plunged
down into the river. I have done this before. I remember. The one half of the city she would
leave untouched. From the other half, none would escape. When men tried to row, she
upended their boats. When they tried to swim, she flipped them out of the water with her tail.
Some of them she caught and ate. Others she simply hurled back into the black haze of
flickering smoke. Yes, I have done this before. There had been other dragons then. And things
that weren't dragons and yet were even more terrifying and made us seem small; and not all
that came out of the smoke and the flames was human. I remember. I remember how this
feels.
It felt glorious.
She stayed until no one else came to the waterfront. Perhaps an hour passed, perhaps more.
Certainly the sun had moved when she took to the air again. She felt sated. Fulfilled? Free?
Happy. That was what she felt. Happy. She hadn't felt happy for a very long time. Lifetimes.
This is not vengeance, Kemir. If you knew the truth, if you felt what I feel now, you would
wish it was. I feel joy.
He couldn't know. Not now, not yet, not for a little while. Not until she was done with him. So
she took her time flying back to him on his hill, until she could push the feeling back beneath
the waters of her thoughts. Until she could keep it in a place Kemir would never see but where
she would never forget.

30

The Secrets of the Alchemists
'King Valmeyan left this morning,' said Jeiros. He wasn't looking at Jehal as he was talking.
Well he was, but not at Jehal's face. He frowned and leaned forward. 'You need to relax,' he
said as Jehal winced in anticipation of yet more pain. 'Stay very still. Neither of us would be
pleased if my stitches go awry.'
All very well for you to say. A searing jab ran right up from his groin as far as his neck. And
this is with my veins filled with more Dreamleaf than blood. He bit down on the leather strap
that the alchemist had given him.
'Are you still finding it difficult to pass water?'
This is what his father had had to put up with. In the beginning, before disease had taken his
mind away. Help to stand, help to eat, help to clean himself. Help with everything. I'd rather
die. 'I wouldn't call it difficult. Uncomfortable,' he said through gritted teeth. Unbearable
blinding agony, more like. But only Kazah sees how much it pains me, and Kazah doesn't
speaks so none of you will ever know.

'The speaker has promised to crown you as soon as you are able to walk into the Glass
Cathedral.'
'And how long will that be, Master Alchemist?' She hasn't come to see me. No word. Nothing.
Does she thin\ I can't watch her from in here? Does she thinly I don't see who she takes to her
bed? He fingered the strip of white silk he kept hidden beneath his pillow. Even confined to
his bed, the magical metal Taiytakei dragons roamed the palace at night, guided by his whim.
Prince Tichane, King Valmeyan's right hand, he was the one to watch. He had his hands
halfway up Zafir's gown already and was plenty busy elsewhere too. Jehal needed to know
what he was up to. I need to move. Watching is one thing, but I need to hear. I need to speak.
I need to walk. I need to be seen. How quickly people forget that I am even here.
The Secrets of the Alchemists
'Another week, perhaps two.' Jeiros shook his head. 'I'm having the best wood-carvers in the
city make a crutch for you for the occasion.'
'So I can stumble in with one lifeless leg dragging behind me? No, thank you.'
'It'll be months before you can walk without help. If you ever can. You need to be crowned,
Jehal. There are far too many realms without a proper king. Right.' Jeiros straightened up.
'There. The stitches are done. The dressing is changed. You're rid of me for another day.
Before you're crowned, there's another ceremony we should have, you and I. I suppose you
know most of it already, but there are certain secrets that my order holds that we like to share
with our kings and queens.'
Jehal rolled his eyes. 'You mean things like, oh, by the way, the dragons you fly on are only
dumb pliable beasts when they're drugged to the eyeballs with your special potions.'
'That's the start of it, yes. It can take anything between a week and a month for the effects to
wear off. Did you know that?'
'And then they're ravening vengeful monsters. I do know what happened at the redoubt,
Jeiros.'
'Then you know how clever they become. The white one's been seen again. Did you know
that, Your Holiness?'
'No. I heard it was dead with the rest.'
Jeiros cocked his head and flashed a grimace. 'That's what princes get to hear. Kings get to
hear that the white has been seen in the Worldspine. Without a rider this time. It burned
exactly half a town to ash. Some of Valmeyan's riders went to investigate. Three of them
didn't come back: nor did their dragons. By now it could be more.'
Jehal sniggered. 'No wonder the King of the Crags is in such a hurry to be home. And I
suppose Zafir is positively brimming with enthusiasm to rally the realms and her riders to
hunt your mysterious rogue.'
'This is not funny.'
'You keep them in dim servitude. Are you surprised they're so angry when they wake up?'
'The Order keeps us all alive, Prince Jehal. We'd be nothing to them but food otherwise.'
'If anyone did something like that to me and was then foolish enough to let me slip, I'm quite
sure I would prefer something more lingering than simply eating them.' Are you listening,
Vale Tassan?
The alchemist shook his head. 'There's a lot more. Where they come from, where they go
when they die. Even we don't know that. But we know that their spirits go in an endless cycle.
They're not like us. They remember their past lives, or rather they would, if they awoke. Do
you know how many times dragons have escaped us and awoken from their stupor?' Jehal had
never heard of such a thing happening at all, at least not until the white dragon at the redoubt.
It must have shown on his face because Jeiros smiled. 'No, Prince Jehal, the redoubt was not
the first time. There are dragons out there among us who have awoken before. Who have

awoken and been destroyed. Who have returned as a hatchling, remembering everything that
happened to them. Knowing everything that we do to them.'
'And then you do it to them again.'
'If we can, yes.' Jeiros nodded. 'If we can't then they die. You see, Prince Jehal, there is a great
deal that even you don't know. Knowledge we hold for kings and queens and the masters of
our order, and for them alone.'
'Kings and queens and master alchemists? Why so miserly?'
'Knowledge is dangerous, Prince Jehal. You of all people understand that. Knowledge is a
means to power. '
Jehal laughed, even though that always hurt. 'And there I was, imagining that you were
hoarding all this knowledge simply to give your order a reason for being.'
The alchemist didn't bite. If anything, he sounded sad. 'Seventy years ago, a rider happened
upon some of our secrets. He took it upon himself to free his dragon of our potions. He
thought they would be more powerful, and indeed they are. His dragon ate him. Then it ate a
lot of other people too. It destroyed a realm. Nor was that the first time.'
'I've never heard of this!'
'Oh you but have, Prince Jehal. You know almost everything about it. The story of a realm
ripped apart by its own royal family's infighting? Their eyries destroyed, their riders slain,
their dragons
stolen? A realm rendered so weak that those around it simply helped themselves to the pieces.
A realm that barely exists any more, with no king, no queen. A realm whose people shift in
endless wandering though the Sea of Sand ...' 'The Syuss.'
'The Syuss. You see. You do know the story.' 'But that was ... I thought that was ...'
The master alchemist was smiling again. 'Prince Kazan? Civil war? A revolt against the
oppressions of King Tiernel? No. Kazan was the rider stupid enough to awaken his dragon.
Twelve other dragons went missing trying to find him. Fortunately half of them didn't have
time to wake and still it took the intervention of three neighbouring realms and Speaker
Ayzalmir to put an end to it. Hundreds of riders were killed. Most of what you think you
know is true, the picking over the pieces afterwards, the destruction of the realm as it was. But
the beginning ...' Jeiros grinned broadly. 'Not what you think. There are always the same
number of dragons in the realms, Prince Jehal. This is why you have so many eggs in your
eyrie and yet so few of them hatch, because no egg can hatch until another dragon dies. But
do you know why? Do you know how many? When they do hatch, a quarter of hatchlings
only last a few days. Again, do you know why? Do you know how the dragons were tamed?
No, you don't.'
'No, there you are wrong, Master Jeiros.' Jehal screwed up his face as he shifted slightly in his
bed. 'I know that story. The last of the great wizards sucked all the magic out of the realms in
one mighty spell ...' He stopped. Jeiros was trying not to laugh.
'Forgive me, Your Holiness. The stories of the Adamantine Spear and of the last great wizard
and other such mumbo-jumbo. These are stories for children, not for kings, not even for
princes.' He cocked his head. 'You know how the dragons at the redoubt were defeated,
poisoned by their own greed. The Embers trace their traditions back to the first free men. We
fed our first potions to the wild dragons in the only way we knew. Then we sought out their
eggs. At first we killed the hatchlings, but then we found we could use them. It made finding
the rest a lot easier.' He chuckled. 'No, the symbols of the speaker are a ring and a spear, but
that is all they are, symbols. They might have had a power once, but not any more.'
Jehal narrowed his eyes. 'Are you lying to me, Master Alchemist? I had thought the Silver
King tamed the dragons.'

Jeiros' face didn't give anything away. 'We guard our secrets well and if you understood them,
you would guard them too.' He reached the door and bowed. 'Good evening to you, Prince
Jehal. When you are a king, we will speak of these matters some more.'
'One moment, Master Alchemist. How much of this does Zafir know?'
Jeiros shook his head. 'She is a queen, Your Holiness, and the speaker. She knows as much as
she needs to know. More than you.' With that, he bowed one last time and left. Jehal closed
his eyes. That's a lot to thinly about and I don't have the strength these days. One at a time
then. The Syuss. He reached into his memories, trying to think, but all the stories he could
remember were filled with holes. He could feel himself drifting, losing his concentration. That
was the Dreamleaf messing with him. Better Dreamleaf than constant burning agony. He
shuddered. If anyone ever wanted to torture him again, all they'd have to do was bring him
back to this room, pull out a chamber pot and wave it at him.
Jeiros is bound to have a book. He can lend it to me. Maybe he can lend me someone to read
it too, so I don't have to find the energy to sit up.
He wasn't sure whether what happened next was a dream or a memory. He was drifting into
sleep and then he was wide awake and the room was much darker; in between, he'd been the
speaker, riding to war, clutching the Adamantine Spear in one hand and a cage full of birds in
the other. When he let the birds out of their cage, he wasn't sure whether he was Ayzalmir,
bringing order and peace to a ruined realm, or whether he was Zafir, and the birds were chaos
and death.
A cold certainty gripped him, that someone else was in the room. He strained his ears. Kazah
was snoring gently but Kazah didn't count. He could feel someone else. A presence lurking in
the shadows, silent and invisible and yet very much there.
'Who are you?' He spoke quietly, almost at a whisper, but in the stillness the words sounded
loud. Calm though. At least they sounded calm.
Now he saw a shadow move. He started to rise, but that sent a spear of pain through him,
'Shall I light a candle?' asked the shadow. 'I don't want to wake the boy.'
'I don't converse with ghosts and shadows. Let me see your face.' Jehal slipped his hand under
his pillow. He had a knife there, always.
'Are you sure?'
'Yes, I'm quite sure, thank you.' I should be shouting for the guard, except most likely they let
him in.
'Very well.' The shadow walked away from Jehal's bed to the far corner of the room where a
night candle burned. The shadow lit another and slowly returned. Now Jehal could see. The
shadow had a man's face. One he'd seen before.
'I know you. You were one of Shezira's men.' Now I really should be shouting for the guard.
But the voice. That was much more recent.
The man laughed very softly. 'Are you afraid of me, Prince Jehal?'
'I am unaccustomed to strangers slipping into my room at night. It sets me on edge.' The
voice. I know the voice. He wasn't a rider.
'Whereas I am very much accustomed to it. I've been in here with you before. Do you
remember? We made an agreement. As deathbed visions go, I like you. That's what you said.
Ringing any bells?'
'Ah.' Jehal's mouth felt very dry. 'I'd rather hoped you were a hallucination. I liked you a lot
better that way.'
'And I liked you a lot better when you were nearly dead.' 'Who are you?'
'I have many names. Kithyr will do. I am a blood-mage. No one else could have saved your
life and I meant every word about putting the poison in your blood right back where it came
from. I have it stashed carefully away, should I ever need it. You are mine, Jehal.'

'Right.' Jehal's fingers closed around the hilt of his knife. Never mind the pain. One quick
strike and it's over. Then you can scream. 'So now you want something from me in return for
my life. And if I don't give it to you, you're going to kill me? Do you really think that's going
to work?'
The candle threw strange shadows over the blood mage's face.
It made his features shift and blur and change so they were almost impossible to read. 'Taking
the poison out of your wound also took a great deal from me, Prince Jehal. I told you then that
what I truly want for that is not yet something that is yours to give. What I want now is more
of a first instalment, and much more in your gift. What interests me now is money.'
The fingers gripping the knife relaxed. 'Money? How very tedious of you. Still, if you say you
saved my life ...'
'Not your money.' The mage seemed genuinely annoyed. 'The speaker's money. She offers her
own weight in gold for each of the Red Riders. That is a tantalising prospect, is it not?'
'Oh, I don't know.' Jehal yawned. 'She's rather small and skinny.' He cocked his head.
'Anyway, if that's what you're after, you seem to have slipped into the wrong bedchamber,
blood-mage. I do not appear to be the speaker.'
The mage uttered a soft laugh. 'Even if I abased myself before her throne, I could not be sure
that Zafir wouldn't have me put to death simply for being what I am.'
'Zafir is nothing if not a pragmatist.' Now Jehal laughed as well. 'Ancestors! If Shezira was
prepared to have a blood-mage around, well, the Edict of Vishmir might as well not exist.'
'Whatever else she is, Zafir is a daughter of the Silver City. Her blood and ours have a very
old score to settle. As for Queen Shezira, she had no idea what I was.'
Which had to be true, and so it must have been Shezira's knight-marshal who'd found the
blood-mage. A woman of true vision. Brave and bold and cunning and ruthless. Everything I
have in Meteroa and more, and so fanatically, obstinately loyal. He sighed. Such a pity. Now,
do I shout for the guards or not? Where are we going with this, blood-mage? There was still
the knife, still quick and easy to hand.
'I want the Red Riders, Prince Jehal. They have served their purpose and now I want them
gone. I can give them to you and you can give them to the speaker. You will get her gold and
her favour. Half the gold you will give to me. The favour you can keep. By this we shall see
that we can trust each other.'
Trust? Ha! 'Really. You can give them to me?'
kithyr blew out the candle, plunging the room into darkness. 'Really. Drotan's Top, Prince
Jehal. When Valmeyan is safely back
in his mountains. Sooner or later they will strike again at Drotan's Top. When they do they
will be yours for the taking.' 'And if I don't?'
'Then the poison goes back in your blood, Prince, and you die.' 'I will be a king after this.'
Kithyr stood by the door. 'And at the speaker's right hand again, and neither will save you,
Jehal. It's a simple enough thing that I ask. It costs you nothing and gains you a great deal.'
'That is true.' Jehal smiled and watched the mage go. Then he wiped his palm, lay back and
stared at the ceiling. Very true. 'Sooner or later is somewhat vague, blood-mage. I might have
deduced that for myself.'
'Yes, you might.' The voice wafted from across the room. 'Then how about this, Prince? In
four weeks to the day they will strike again at Drotan's Top. Does that suit you better? I could
have it be sooner, but I imagine you will need some time to prepare. I hope, when you see that
I am right, you will understand with whom you are dealing and think long and hard about our
other agreement.'
Jehal didn't answer. He heard the door whisper open and closed again. When he was sure he
was alone, he breathed a deep sigh. His heart was racing.
'Yes,' he whispered to the night. 'Long and hard. I think I shall.'

He had to wait a long time before sleep came to him again. He felt alive, more alive than he
had for weeks, more alive than he had since Hyram's fall. When he did finally sink into
slumber, he was grinning.

31

The Mausoleum
Jaslyn left Evenspire as soon as politeness allowed. They barely said goodbye. She didn't tell
Almiri where she was going; in fact, she didn't tell anyone. Jaslyn and Hyrkallan and the half
a hundred dragons she'd brought with her to Evenspire. North towards home, for the sake of
any prying eyes, high over the Blackwind Hills until they passed Fardale and Southwatch and
the Last River. Up in the north there were no foothills, no grassy rolling slopes. Just ash and
pale silver sand, rippling in giant waves until they crashed against the immense white and
grey cliff faces at the edge of the Worldspine. No rivers, no trees, no grass, only ash and sand.
Ash and sand. That's all there was to the north. Endless days of dead nothingness before the
land slowly changed once more.
When they were well and truly out of sight, they parted ways. Most flew on, back to
Outwatch, Southwatch and Sand. The places they belonged. Jaslyn, though, turned west,
towards the Worldspine, with Hyrkallan and two others that he'd chosen beside them.
Hyrkallan didn't like it, had sternly advised against it. Hyrkallan could go screw himself. In
the safety of the deep dead peaks, they turned back south and began their long journey
towards the sea. Little streaks of green began to appear in the valleys below, desperate little
strips of life clinging to the shady spaces where a few tiny streams would flow on those rare
days when the rain came. Out here even the mountain stones seemed bleached white by the
heat. Then they crossed the deep gash that seemed to run like an open wound all the way as
far as she could see, even into the immeasurable heart of the Spine. The valley of the Last
River. The last water in the north, the blood of her realm that ran past the edge of the
Blackwind Hills and Southwatch and Sand and all the little hot and dusty towns of Ishmar's
Valley until it
staggered away into the desert again and finally expired, if it was lucky, in the Lake of
Ghosts.
She thought of turning west again, of launching herself even deeper into the Worldspine if
only to see what she might find. She always thought of that when she came out here. The
Worldspine was rumoured to be filled with hidden valleys, or else to rise up ever higher, until
it touched the sky, so high even dragons couldn't pass over. Or else, some said that beyond the
Spine lay other realms, another speaker, another palace, yet more dragons, a world a mirror of
this one. Up here, this far north, no one would ever find her. The Worldspine belonged to the
King of the Crags, or so they told her, but here, she was quite sure, it belonged to no one but
itself.
Yes, a part of Jaslyn was minded to explore but that part would have to wait. For now, she
had a duty to her sisters. To Almiri, who sat on her dead husband's throne, who was so still
that she might have been a statue, whose face looked as brittle as fine glass. Almiri had not
taken the news well, though it had hardly come as a surprise. Her husband and their mother,
beheaded by a dozen soldiers. No one there to bear witness. No one to hear their last words.
Their bodies hung in cages outside the palace instead of being fed to their dragons. And all
Jaslyn could do was wonder: What if they were guilty? What if mother did kill Hyram? What

if she did try to have Zafir murdered? Is it so unlikely? I wasn't there, I didn't see it all unfold,
so how do I know it's not true?
And to Lystra, most of all to little sister Lystra. The last news was that the Viper was going to
live after all. Which was a pity, and was what had finally convinced her to fly south and not
north. She needed her sister. She needed Lystra to tell her who to fight. To tell her that Jehal
was a monster to be slain. Or to tell her that she was wrong. Or, more simply, she needed
Lystra to be there. Next to her. In the flesh, alive and breathing. To hug and hold and laugh
and tell her that life was not quite so bleak as these mountains. So she stayed her course and
watched the valleys below spring into timid uncertain life, still clinging to the great rivers and
the few little streams that fed them. They stopped for a night in a valley looking down over
the Blackwind River, four riders and four dragons, surrounded by emptiness. In the morning
they flew on, steadily south, and as they came closer to the Purple Spur,
it seemed as though a line of shadow speckled with stars crossed the spines and ridges of the
mountains. Snowfields sprang up, the greens of the valleys thickened and filled with trees and
rushing water. Valmeyan's realm. Hyrkallan guided them uneasily now, took them low into
the valleys where there was little to see but the rush of trees below and snow-spattered cliffs
to either side. But the mountains were empty; King Valmeyan's dragons were ensconced
around the Mirror Lakes, slowly eating their way through the speaker's cattle.
They reached the abyss of the Gnashing Snapper Gorge, where the immense mass of the Fury
roared through the depths of the Worldspine. Hyrkallan tipped B'thannan's wings and they
dived into it, down deep between black slabs of rock only a few dragon-spans apart. Jaslyn's
ears popped and throbbed. The world became as dark as night as they fell and the air filled
with spray and the thunder of rushing water. As Hyrkallan slowly levelled his descent and
skimmed across the black waters, Jaslyn looked up. Far above her, the sky had gone so dark
that she could see stars.
Slowly the gorge widened out. The river slowed and they passed the startled eyes of Hanzen's
Camp, the last stop for even the most adventurous boats plying the Fury River. They stopped
for a second night not far away on the edge of the Worldspine, a hundred miles east of
Drotan's Top and then drifted up again with the dawn, veering a little eastwards but still flying
south, out over the swathes of rolling green that were the Raksheh, the Thousand-Mile Forest,
squeezed between the endless flat grey clouds above and the rolling green ones below. In the
hills and plains to the faraway east, Zafir's eyries were almost empty, her dragons dispatched
to the palace. Once, in the far distance, back towards the mountains they'd abandoned, they
saw four other dragons flying north, high in the sky and deep among the peaks. Other than
that, they saw no one. As the light failed they stopped again in the empty depths of the forest,
at the ancient abandoned Moonlight Garden, looking out over the wild Yamuna River and at
the Aardish caves where Vishmir the Great and, some said, the Silver King himself were laid
to rest, Jaslyn stood there amid the blood-red marble stones veined with yellow and watched
the moon rise. In a place like this, in this wilderness of lonely emptiness and the stone relics
of a people who
had died and gone long ago, she felt strangely at home. Outwatch was like this. Surrounded
by desolation, old beyond measure, crafted by hands long dead with skills long forgotten.
Enduring. Everlasting.
Unlike everything else.
She sighed and tried to sleep under the cool open skies of the south. The dreams that came to
her were strange, always were in this place. Of men with white hair and silver skin and wide
blood-red eyes. Of the Silver Kings.
They flew away again with the dawn, saddlesore and weary although the dragons who did all
the work seemed untroubled by their long flight. South-east now, down the Yamuna River
and out across the rolling deep green canopy of the Raksheh. As they took off it started to

rain, low grey clouds rolling in off the Sea of Storms far away to the south. Rain. It was
delicious. A novelty for those born to the desert realm of Sand and Stone.
They crossed the edge of the Raksheh, the dark sprawl of trees breaking up into a patchwork
of fields and copses laced with a dark spider-web of muddy roads and spattered with hamlets
and farmhouses. As they did, Jaslyn saw a single dragon far in the distance. She urged on
Morning Sun until he was alongside B'thannan and signalled to Hyrkallan, but by then the
other dragon had seen them and sped away. They flew on a little further, closing in on the
grand eyrie of Clifftop. Jaslyn looked for a open space and brought Morning Sun as gently as
she could to the ground, thundering into the side of a hill, slipping and stumbling, tearing
gouges as deep as a man out of the thick damp earth. A flock of sheep scattered in panic in
front of them. Jaslyn felt a sharp stab of desire from her dragon. Hunger. He hadn't eaten since
Evenspire. When she told him no, he snorted and tossed his head, blew a column of flame a
hundred feet up into the air, the rain around his face sizzling into steam.
Jaslyn sat, slowly getting wet. The air smelled of dragon and the rich dark soil. Without the
wind in her ears, the world fell silent apart from the steady hiss of the rain. She sat and she
waited, alone in the emptiness while Hyrkallan and his two outriders circled above to mark
where she was. That was how it was done, when a stranger on a dragon entered a foreign
realm. Like an animal
rolling on its back, exposing its belly to show it meant no harm.
Eventually the dragon from Clifftop came back with others. One rider landed nearby, his
dragon shaking and tearing the earth once again. The rest stayed in the air, circling. Jaslyn
told him who she was and why she'd come. She had no idea who he was. She wasn't at all sure
that he believed her either, but then maybe he did. Or maybe he'd seen her at Lystra's
wedding. Maybe he'd been one of the dozen and more southern riders who'd gallantly asked
for her hand at a dance only to be brushed away without even a smile. Climbing to the top of
the hill and then hurling themselves down the side, the dragons raced and flapped their wings
and ripped the earth with their claws once again until they launched themselves into the air,
one after the other. She followed him towards Clifftop, trying not to think of what would be
waiting when they got there. Ceremonies and greetings and all manner of tedious rituals to go
through. All a waste of time. From Clifftop to the palace of Furymouth was most of a day on
the back of a horse, longer in a carriage. She didn't have much time before she'd have to fly
back, and every hour she spent at the eyrie was an hour away from Lystra.
Except it wasn't. At Clifftop Jaslyn let Morning Sun dive and then spread his wings and
almost stop in the air before smashing into the ground, the way all dragons like to land. She
threw off her harness and slid from the dragon's back and there was Lystra, little sister Lystra,
right in front of her only a few dozen yards away. In the rain, Jaslyn had to blink a couple of
times to be sure. Then she had to blink again. Tears this time. Protocols and rituals could go
hang. She raced across the ground and grabbed her sister, almost lifting her off the ground.
She remembered the smell of the air here. The smell of the sea, the distant sound of the waves
crashing against the cliffs below.
'Lystra!' She still had to keep blinking.
'Jaslyn!' Lystra seemed reserved, returning her embrace with only a measure of joy. Jaslyn
took a second to realise why.
'Ancestors! You're so big! When will it be? It can't be long! Look at you!' She put a hand on
her sister's big round belly and smiled. The first smile since ... she couldn't remember. Since
Lystra's wedding perhaps.
Lystra smiled too, the shy proud smile that Jaslyn remembered. The smile that made her heart
melt, and perhaps Jehal's too. 'Another two months, they tell me.'
'So long? You look ready now!' The thought of Lystra as a mother had a bitterness to it.
Almiri had already given Valgar three heirs. She was the last one. Lystra was all grown up,

not little any more. But that sort of thinking wasn't helpful, wasn't why she'd come. 'Why are
you here at Clifftop? You should be at the palace with everyone to look after you!' She
stepped back. For the first time she realised that Lystra was clothed from head to foot in grey.
'You're in mourning! What's happened?' Someone was dead. Jehal? Her heart jumped with
hope. Could it somehow be Jehal? Is he dead after all?
Lystra looked confused. 'You mean you don't know? How can you not know. Mother ...'
Oh. Yes. That. Jaslyn looked down at herself. Not a trace of grey. She'd almost... No. Not
almost. She'd actually forgotten. For a few days she'd forgotten that her own mother had been
executed. She'd tried to forget that horror along with everything else, and for once she'd
actually managed it. Now she felt ashamed.
There were several men and women standing either side of Lystra. Jaslyn had ignored them
totally until one of them coughed and smiled and stepped forward.
'Meteroa, Your Holiness.' The man bowed. Holiness. She still couldn't get used to people
calling her that. 'I am King Jehal's eyrie-master and I am at your service. I do my best to
advise Queen Lystra while he is away. Currently I have advised her to move away from the
palace. The air here is cleaner. So is the water. And indeed the food, I have discovered.' He
raised an eyebrow as if he meant to convey some complex meaning. Jaslyn had no idea what
he was talking about. She should have worn grey. She should have worn grey if only for
Lystra. I never liked our mother but I know you did. I always thought you were her favourite
because you were the pretty one, but maybe it wasn't that. Maybe she liked you the best
because you were the only one of us who liked her back. I'm sorry, I'm sorry.
'Can you ...' She was still looking at Lystra. Could she what? Forgive her? For forgetting that
their mother and their queen was dead? For being as coldly indifferent as the speaker?
'I'm sure Queen Lystra understands.' Meteroa smiled. 'You are almost at war with Speaker
Zafir. There is little time for mourning. It is a luxury, I know. I assume that's why you're here.'
'I ...' Is that why I'm here? 'I wanted to see my sister again. In case it was the last time.' She
cocked her head at Meteroa, desperate to talk about something else. I want to be alone with
my sister. ALONE! 'Since you are here, Eyrie-Master, I have a question for you. Do you have
dragons who refuse their food? Hatchlings who sicken and starve and die?'
Meteroa chuckled. 'All eyries have them, Your Holiness. Tarrangan's Curse, we call it here.
Three dragons live, one dragon dies. So it's always been.'
'Do you have any of them here right now?'
'Hissing and snarling at the end of their chains in some deep cavern beneath our feet? You ask
strange questions, Your Holiness.' Meteroa looked baffled. 'I have no idea why you ask me
this, but no, at present we do not. Why? Why do you wish to know? If I have your permission
to ask, Your Holiness?'
'No.' Jaslyn shook her head, all interest suddenly gone. 'No, you don't.' She shivered. 'May we
go?'
Meteroa bowed. 'Of course, Your Holiness.' He led them towards the cliff-top towers and in
among the sprawling walls. 'The King of the Crags is returning to his mountains, I hear. It is
curious, Your Holiness. Why would he emerge from the Worldspine for this when he doesn't
even come for the crowning of a new speaker? I cannot help but wonder about that. Valmeyan
has more dragons than any two kings or queens put together. It is something of a quandary.
Can you enlighten me, Your Holiness?'
Jaslyn thought she sensed the faintest hint of mockery in Meteroa's voice. She bristled. 'No.
I'm sure Prince Jehal will know the answer.'
'King Jehal,' purred Meteroa. 'King Tyan died five weeks ago.'
Five weeks? Why didn't I know this? Jaslyn turned to Lystra. 'Then if Jehal dies, you're
queen!' She could slap herself. She must sound like an idiot. Meteroa had been calling Lystra
his queen ever since they'd arrived. What's the matter with me?

Lystra was staring at faslyn. Her eyes were very big and glistening with tears All of a sudden
she stepped closer and embraced
Jaslyn again. 'I know you think the worst of him,' she whispered, 'but he has the heart of a
good man, not a wicked one. All the things they say about him, they aren't true. I know. I see
him in a way no one else does. Don't wish him dead, Jaslyn, please.'
Jaslyn froze. A shiver ran through her. She held Lystra tight. 'You've changed,' she whispered.
She couldn't think of anything else. There. That was every question I had, answered in a
stroke. Now I might as well go home.
Lystra straightened and stepped away. 'Jehal tried to save Mother from Zafir's headsman.
That's why he was imprisoned.'
'Did he? Did he really?' Jaslyn couldn't bring herself to believe in Jehal. If he did, he had a
selfish reason for it.
'He was trying to save the realms from a war, I think,' murmured Meteroa. 'Always a foolish
pursuit.' He turned and grinned at Jaslyn. 'Since you're here, I suppose he must have failed.'
'I came to see my sister.' Go away!
Meteroa didn't go away. All through the dregs of the day he was constantly at Lystra's side.
To protect her, he said, from all the little dangers that others don't see, although he wouldn't
say what those dangers were, and Lystra had practically been born and bred in an eyrie. The
next day was no better, although Meteroa at least took Jaslyn around Clifftop to present his
dragons. Quite a collection, Jaslyn realised. Jehal didn't have as many as Isentine held at
Outwatch, but such a variety! So many colours and shapes and sizes. Hunters and wardragons of course, like every other eyrie, but some were ... something else. Smaller, too small
even to be hunters. Then he led her into the caves etched into the cliffs, into tunnels and
darkness where everything smelled of smoke and Jaslyn could barely hear what he was
saying, where all his words were blotted out by memories of choking air and rushing water
and the deadly tightness of the alchemists' redoubt. She could barely breathe. Cold sweat
clung to her skin, gripping her, wrapping her in suffocating arms. Twice she stumbled and
leaned on Lystra to keep herself from falling, and then finally a blast of fresh air and light
thundered into her. They emerged into a gallery overlooking a yawning void. A hundred feet
below, the sea crashed and roared over a tumble of black boulders that littered the cave
mouth. Sunlight reached inside to light up the stone walls beyond, worn
smooth by the waves. Further in lay a deep pool of still dark water. The air was fresh and
salty.
'No use for dragons, this one,' said Meteroa, shouting to make himself heard over the noise of
the spray. 'No easy way in and out. We use this cave for something else. The kings of
Furymouth have always kept their collection here.'
Jaslyn took deep breaths, sucking the cool fresh air into her lungs, cleansing them of the
memory of smoke. 'Collection?'
'Collection.' Meteroa pointed out into the emptiness of the cave. Slowly, as Jaslyn's eyes
adjusted to the brightness of the sun pouring in off the sea, she saw that there were things
suspended in the air. Bones. Blackened bones. Dragon bones. Whole dragon skeletons.
'Are they real?' She stood agape. Dragons burned when they died. Burned from the inside out
so that nothing was left except their scales and their wings. Maybe a few charred bones from
the end of their tail, but everything else went to ash. She'd never seen the skeleton of a
dragon. No one had. Or at least that's what she'd thought until now. Now there were four of
them in front of her. They were enormous.
Meteroa nodded, sounding solemn. 'Very real, Your Holiness.'
'How?'
He pointed down to the water below. 'The Salt Pool. The sea barely reaches into the cave, but
the pool beneath us is deep. Sometimes when a dragon is dying we bring it here to the Salt

Pool. We feed it the same poisons as the Embers took when they fought for you and the
alchemists. When a dragon dies in the Salt Pool, the water is enough to save the bones. The
salt ruins the scales though. We don't bring them here very often.' He pointed. 'The nearest is
Awestriker. He was King Tyan's last mount. Prince Jehal had the dragon slain when it became
clear that his father would never ride her any more. The furthest is Bludgeon. That was the
first dragon to be brought to the Salt Pool. They say the first king of Furymouth, the bloodmage Tyan from whom King Jehal's father took his name, came here. There had been a battle.
This was long before Narammed and Vishmir and the rise of the speakers. The Order of the
Dragon had risen up in the Silver City and ousted the blood-mages from the Pinnacles. The
battle was lost, the magus' dragon was damaged and he did not want it to fall into the hands
of the Order. He brought the dragon here to hide it. The dragon died. Later, when the Order
came and Tyan fled, they sent soldiers to the cave to bring back the scales. The scales were
ruined, but they found the bones instead. For days no one understood where the bones had
come from. Sea monsters, they said. Eventually they realised the bones came from Tyan's
dragon.' Meteroa smiled. 'Of course, that was long before there was an eyrie at Clifftop.
Come. There's more.'
He walked along a narrow ledge carved into the sheer side of the cave. Jaslyn followed
nervously. Lystra stayed where she was. The ledge was rough, a foot wide or sometimes less,
and the Salt Pool was far below. Small niches had been cut into the wall, tenuous handholds
to offer an illusion of safety. Meteroa moved carefully and methodically. 'The menagerie may
interest you, Your Holiness, if you have an interest in dragons.'
The ledge ran for some fifty feet before it opened out into a wide natural gallery. There were
more skeletons here, much smaller than the monsters hanging over the bulk of the cave. These
were hatchlings, so small they must have been fresh out of the egg.
'We've been breeding them like this since the realms begun, Your Holiness.' Meteroa smiled
again. 'Not many of our visitors are privileged to come down here but I know this isn't wasted
on you. And you are our king's sister now. The interesting ones are back here.'
One of the hatchlings had two heads.
Jaslyn stared at them in disbelief. Half of them were deformed. Two heads, two tails, four
wings ...
'Blood-magic,' said Meteroa with a curl of disgust, although whether he meant it or it was
feigned Jaslyn couldn't tell. 'A few of our kings have had a taste for it. They were set on
breeding a new kind of dragon. This is what they got. They never had any success.
Fortunately the local penchant for blood-mages has died away. We work with the alchemists
now, using potions to try and evolve the breeds.'
'You want to breed a dragon with two heads?' Jaslyn couldn't contain her disbelief. Meteroa
laughed.
'No. It's all about the colour of the scales, the timbre of their sheen, that sort of thing. That's
why Jehal so wanted your white dragon.
A new strain, a new bloodline, perhaps we could have done something different. You breed
your dragons for speed and strength; we're known through the realms for the most colourful
dragons.' He chuckled again. 'In different times, an alliance between our realms would have
been a happy time for me. I would have spent a great deal of time in your eyrie and you in
mine. We could have traded secrets, eyrie-master to eyrie-master. We could have traded
bloodlines. I had high hopes for what our eyries might produce if they worked together. Who
knows - maybe those dreams are not quite lost?' He talked on and on and Jaslyn soaked up
every word. Meteroa knew what he was doing and he knew his dragons. She got lost in them
and almost forgot why she was there. Other things slipped in. Jehal's imprisonment, his injury,
his recovery. The poisons Meteroa had found in the kitchens. The sabotage to the saddles of

Lystra's horses. A dozen other ambiguous little clues, all of them pointing to Zafir. Evil,
wicked Zafir.
'King Jehal was so sure he would keep her in check. I'm afraid he rather seems to have failed.'
Meteroa sighed. 'Queen Lystra lives at Clifftop now because it's safer. I trust the alchemists
and the Scales here more than my own riders and certainly more than the servants in the
palace. I had thought we knew all of Zafir's secrets, but I'm afraid we rather failed there too.
It's all quite depressing. Come, Your Holiness. We've left your sister for long enough. If we
delay any further she may have one of her foolish moments and try to follow us.'
The eyrie-master retraced his steps. Jaslyn followed, easing her way uncertainly along the
ledge. When they returned, Lystra was sitting on the edge with her feet dangling over the Salt
Pool, tossing stones down into the water. She glared at them both.
'Meteroa, you've taken my sister away for far too long and I'm immensely bored. I am cross
with you.'
Meteroa bowed. 'I am deeply sorry, Your Holiness. To make amends, I shall arrange a great
entertainment for you. I shall leave at once. I trust you will be safe in the care of your sister.'
He turned to Jaslyn and his face became serious. 'There are men I trust not far away. You will
be left alone. If you are not, you should assume that whoever approaches von means you
harm. You are armed?'
Jaslyn nodded
'Good. I suppose, apart from myself, you're the one person I will leave alone with my queen
until my king returns.' He suddenly looked weary and shook his head. 'It has been a
regrettably interesting few weeks. I will not be far away.'
With that he turned and walked slowly away into the tunnels. Jaslyn stood alone with her
sister, staring out into the cave, breathing the damp salt air. For a long time they were silent.
Then Lystra held out a hand and Jaslyn took it.
'There's another path,' said Lystra in a whisper. 'You can climb down to the cave mouth. Then
there are steps carved into the cliff to take you back to the top. It's very steep and very
slippery and you'd like it. Shall we?'
'No.' Jaslyn squeezed her sister's hand, then crouched down and put her ear to Lystra's belly.
Lystra began to stroke her hair. 'Two more months. And they won't let you fly?'
'Meteroa doesn't want me to fly.'
'But he has to do what you say.'
'No, he has to do what Jehal says.'
Jaslyn put a hand next to her ear. 'I can feel the baby! It's moving.'
'Yes.' Lystra hugged Jaslyn's head. 'Isn't it magic?'
'On the back of a dragon is the safest place in the world,' whispered Jaslyn. 'Why won't they
let you fly?' She stood up and held Lystra tightly. Why won't they let you fly?'
Lystra laughed softly. 'Why won't you climb the cliff with me?'
'You might fall.'
'Yes. I might fall.' She pulled away and held Jaslyn's hands. She was still smiling. 'I can't be
the Lystra you remember. I have to be a queen now. Soon I will have to be a mother.'
'The speaker is trying to kill you.'
'Jehal will keep me safe.' She spoke with conviction. Love even. Jaslyn winced. The hurt was
like a knife.
'Come back to Outwatch with me.' Her voice was trembling. 'We'll slip away in the night
when he's not watching you. Speaker Zafir won't know where you've gone. You'll be safe.'
Lystra squeezed Jaslyn's hands. 'Of course she'll know where I've gone. No, Jaslyn. A part of
my heart is always yours, but my place is here.'
'Lystra! Sister!' How to make her understand that Jehal was a monster. That he was vicious,
that he was a murderer, that he had no love for anyone but himself, that as likely as not he was

Zafir's lover. The very woman who's trying to murder you. He doesn't care about you. You're
nothing to him. Just something to be veiled behind screens, making babies and heirs until he
tires of you. He'll take what he wants, bleed you dry and crush you. Like Aliphera. Like
Hyram. Like Mother.
She wanted to say all of those things, but the words stuck in her throat. She saw Lystra's wide
eyes and knew she couldn't wound her sister with them. That even if she did Lystra wouldn't
believe her. That Jehal, for now, had won. The understanding made her weep, despite herself.
'You don't belong to us any more, do you?' she croaked.
They held each other tight, and then Lystra kissed her. A long, lingering kiss. The sort meant
for lovers. 'I will always be your sister, Jaslyn. Promise me we will never be enemies.'
Jaslyn bit her lip and nodded. 'Never. I promise. Promise me you will stay safe.'
'I will.'
'I miss you, little Lystra. I will never, never let anyone hurt you.'
'I know. I miss you too.'
For a long time they stood together, holding hands. Jaslyn wept in silence. Eventually she
turned and led Lystra back into the tunnels, back to the eyrie-master's men. Then she left the
tunnels, summoned her riders and her dragons and put Clifftop behind her as quickly as she
could.
Meteroa watched her go, soaring away into the afternoon skies. 'How very sudden and very
rude.' He sniffed and gave his queen a queer look. 'What did you say to her?'
'Nothing. Nothing that she didn't know before she came here.' Her voice was flat and gave
nothing away. Inside, Meteroa smiled. Very good, little one. Very good.
She was looking at him, he realised. She cocked her head. 'Why did you lie to her about the
halchlings?'
Meteroa shrugged. Did I lie? I don't even remember. He grimaced.
'I apologise if this offends you, Your Holiness. Doubtless I shouldn't say such things about
another queen, but your sister is very strange. Hatchlings. What a question to ask.' Now he
laughed. You know, I can't remember the last time someone asked me a question and I hadn't
the first idea why they were asking it.' 'But why did you lie?'
Meteroa smiled. Because I didn't like not knowing why she asked. Because I didn't like the
way she looked at me. Because I think she's dangerous in a way that even Jehal wouldn't
understand.
He couldn't say any of that though, not to his queen, so he settled for something else that was
equally true. 'Because I'm not a particularly nice fellow, Your Holiness. I've made a career of
it. Sometimes I lie simply because I feel like it. Because I can. Keeping my eye in, so to
speak.'
He winked, but Queen Lystra didn't see. She was looking back to the sky, watching her sister
fade into the clouds.

32

The Hunters and the Hunted
Snow was soaring high when the riders came out of the Worldspine, just as Kemir knew they
would. Five dragons, all fast-flying war-dragons, each with two riders. They were wary,
flying in a loose diamond formation, one low and close to the ground, another up high, above
the little puffs of cloud that hung in the air, and then one to each side and the last dragon
hanging back. Kemir didn't know too much about flying dragons, but he knew that riders

looking for a fight flew close together where they could quickly support each other. These
ones were expecting the sort of trouble that would make them turn and run. In hindsight, that
should have been a warning.
As if it would have made any difference. There was probably a right way to attack the
diamond. Kemir had no idea what Prince Lai's Principles had to say, but if he had had to
guess, he'd have said go for the one at the back. Snow, however, had never heard of Prince
Lai. She simply climbed higher, then tucked in her wings and dived out of the sun, smashing
into the dragon at the top of the diamond. The impact would have hurled Kemir far into the air
if it hadn't been for his harness; as it was, the straps nearly tore him in half and he slammed
forward, breaking his nose on Snow's back. The two dragons curled around each other,
plummeting out of the sky together. Kemir didn't see what happened to the riders, but they
must have been in the middle when the two dragons collided — probably now nothing more
than a big bloody smear with bits of armour sticking out.
For a moment everything vanished into a white mist as they fell through a cloud. By the time
they emerged, the dragons were apart. Snow had something dangling out of her mouth. She
shook her head and it flew off through the air, leaving a streak of fine red mist to dissolve in
the wind.
'Ow! Damn you, dragon, you nearly killed me!' He held on to her, arms spread wide, whiteknuckled fingers locked around her scales. The other dragon was diving for the ground now
and Snow wasn't far behind. He could see the ribbon of the river and the town that Snow had
burned, a slight dirty haze that still hung over it.
There. One free. Four to go. She didn't slow down, but arrowed on towards the next dragon,
wings folded back, wind howling around her.
'Alive! Take a rider alive!' bellowed Kemir, as if anyone could hear a thing at such a speed.
He screwed up his face and tried without much success to shield his eyes with his hand. 'Can't
you ever control yourself?'
Why?
'Useful food, remember.' How is it useful?
The riders on the next dragon had seen Snow coming now. She was flying too fast for them to
get out of the way, but they'd turned their scorpion to fire at her.
No, not at her, at her rider. At him. Kemir threw himself flat. A few moments later he felt a
pinch of pain from Snow as the scorpion bolt hit her. He had no idea where. Didn't care much
either. It hadn't struck him, that was what mattered. You could probably shoot a hundred
scorpions into a dragon without doing much more than make it very cross.
No! The dragon's fury slammed into him like a hammer and Kemir roared with anger without
really knowing why. He clenched his fists and would have sat up straight in Snow's saddle,
except as soon as he moved the wind almost ripped him off her back. Then Snow hit the other
dragon like a thirty-ton battering ram. He was thrown up into the air, the harness almost
tearing his legs off this time as both dragons lurched sideways. The other dragon was twisting
to present itself as all claws and teeth, but it wasn't fast enough. Snow snapped at it with her
teeth, raked it with her claws and lashed it with her tail. The teeth got one dragon-knight, the
claws got the second. Kemir wasn't sure what the tail did because he was too busy ducking as
the other dragon's tail snaked around Snow's neck and sliced the air where his head should
have been. Rage filled him. Dragon-rage.
Poison, Kemir. Their bolts are poisoned!
Thoughts jumbled on top of each other, some that were his, some that were not. That if they
were shooting scorpions with dragon-poison on them, they weren't shooting at him. That
Snow ought to flee now, back to the lake. Back to the glaciers, if she could make it. That he
didn't care, that she should stay and kill and kill and then run for the glaciers. How many
poisoned bolts would it take to bring a dragon down? One? Ten? A hundred?

The one between my teeth still has thoughts. They are not useful thoughts, Kemir. I want to
eat him.
'Do you know he's not poisoned too?'
Snow shuddered. She spat the knight out of her mouth. He sailed away through the air with a
forlorn cry and fell out of sight. 'Alive!' screamed Kemir. 'Take one alive!'
Why? Snow turned, throwing Kemir sideways. They were getting close to the ground now. If
Kemir hadn't had about a hundred more pressing things to do, he could have counted the trees
and the animals in the fields beneath them.
The dragon's fury coursed through him.'So we can ask him questions!' So I can kill him
myself. 'About dragon-poison and scorpions.' So I can feed him his own entrails while he's
still alive. 'About how many times they think they need to hit you!' So I can crush his skull
with my bare hands.
The last three dragons were closing now that Snow no longer had height and speed to her
advantage. They were trying to position themselves around her, to trap her. A scorpion bolt
fizzed through the air past Snow's head. Another punched straight through the thin skin of her
wing.
'Go go go! Now!' Kemir urged. The curtain of the dragon-rage was lifting at the edges.
Behind it, his own feelings began creeping through. Fear. Alarm. A certain uneasy dread.
'They've fired. Take them before they can load another bolt!'
Snow veered, twisted and powered towards the nearest dragon, her whole body shuddering as
her wings ripped the air. The straps of the dragon-rider harness groaned and Kemir felt
something at the bottom of his spine pop and creak. Snow closed the gap, but not enough
before the other dragon turned and pulled away. A scorpion bolt from above bounced of
Snows nose. She shrieked in
frustration, turned sharply and launched a futile charge at another of the dragons. That one
danced away too. The riders knew what they were doing. Kemir could just about see that now.
They'd be happy to keep their distance and pepper Snow with their poisoned scorpions for as
long as it took to wear her down. He clung on, gritting his teeth as Snow pivoted and whirled
back and forth. Her wings strained, her seething tail slashing the air, but each dragon she
chased only powered away while the other two closed and took their shots.
'That's what you get for being stupid,' muttered Kemir. He could still feel the fury,
smouldering waves of it pulsing out of Snow like a bad hangover, but he was its master now.
Stupid, Kemir? When I fall out of the sky, I shall be sure to land on my back!
'Stupid because you landed in the middle of a town and burned half of it to the ground. Stupid
because hundreds of people saw a riderless white dragon. Stupid because you never stop to
think-You just smash and burn and eat people.' He flinched as another scorpion bolt split the
air nearby. Snow was climbing again, hauling herself steeply up towards the little scattered
clouds, but Kemir could see straight away that they were too small and too few to offer any
cover. Why am I shouting? Because it makes me feel better, that's why. 'What did you expect?
Did you think they were going to come out here after you and form up in an orderly line to be
eaten?' Wind tore past Kemir's face, almost pulling his words out of his mouth. He could
barely open his eyes. Proper riders had riding helmets with special visors for this sort of thing.
He pushed himself forward into Snow's scales again. In the end, he was helpless up here.
Her scales were hot.
Your thoughts are a distraction, Kemir. They are not helpful.
'My thoughts are a distraction? Well, why don't you just land and let me off then? Then you
can blunder about on your own. It's not like you listen to me anyway and then I won't have to
worry about being shot at by giant arrows any more!'
Kemir!

'Hey, you know what? Next time you burn a town you could jump inside their heads and ask
them to bring some nice tasty
donkeys when they come back to hunt you. They're not stupid, Snow.' In fact so far they've
been cleverer than you. He tried to think the last thought quietly. Not quietly enough, Kemir.
Valmeyan's dragons were faster than Snow. She wasn't quite fully grown. Maybe that was
why, or maybe the mountain men simply had better dragons, war-dragons, stronger and faster
and more enduring. Snow had five bolts in her now and more would come. Sooner or later
they'd get enough poison in her to bite and she and Kemir both knew it. She reached the level
of the clouds and wove through and in between them. The other dragons settled in around her,
patiently awaiting their chances.
I must go back to the mountains. To the lakes.
Into a cloud. Everything white. Turn. Out again into the sunlight.
Kemir could see exactly where that would lead. Snow meant to hide under the water again.
'And what do I do?' The other dragons might be able to follow her but their riders couldn't.
They'd wait for her until she came out again. And, in the meantime, they'll amuse themselves
chasing after me. Three of them on dragons and me on foot. I'd be better off staying with
Snow and hoping to discover a miraculous talent for breathing water. 'They won't give up,' he
shouted. 'They'll stay with you for as long as it takes. Sooner or later you'll have to come out
to eat. They'd be waiting for you.' There. He could even believe that might be true.
Next cloud. Sharp turn. Back into the light. Sprint after one of the other dragons. No good.
Turn again.
And you suggest? She was powering through the air with all her strength, sprinting, turning,
keeping the other dragons at bay for now. It couldn't last. Kemir was pressed flat against her
scales and could already feel her becoming uncomfortably warm even through his furs. Her
thoughts were distinctly irritable. He could see them. She was wondering whether she'd fly
faster without Kemir on her back.
Another cloud. Another turn. Into the light. Straight into another scorpion.
'Get them away from their eyries. They need their potions. They can't follow you if you take
them away from their eyries.'
And where are their eyries, Kemir?
'In the mountains.' Which was certainly true. But for all he knew, there might be eyries all
over the place. He'd never been this side of the Worldspine. Hadn't even known it existed.
Then your advice is flawed, little one. I prefer the lakes. Snow turned sharply in the next
cloud, arrowing back at the three dragons in pursuit. Kemir wasn't sure whether it was her
patience or her strength that had gone first. The other dragons scattered. She spat fire at the
nearest, then pinwheeled and powered towards the distant peaks, climbing higher, putting the
clouds below her. Another scorpion bolt buried itself in her flank. Kemir felt the flash of pain
and anger. A second one sailed over his head. There was something in Snow's thoughts that
he'd never seen before, something that didn't belong. Desperation.
'The sea!' he burst out. 'Go to the sea!'
The sea? There was a pause. Where is the sea?
Kemir tried to form a map of the realms in his mind. 'Somewhere south.'
Why is the sea better than a lake that is smaller but closer?
'Because it's called the Endless Sea for a reason. Because there aren't any eyries. You can fly
and keep on going and they'll have to give up and go home, and when they come back they'll
never be able to find you.' And you can float on the surface and I can stay on your back and
no one needs to drown or be taken by the dragon-riders.
It is far away, is it not, Kemir? Very far.
That was probably true. He didn't know where they were any more. 'I don't know.' He glanced
over his shoulder, looking for the pursuit. Snow was leaving a trail of smoke in the air behind

her. No, not smoke, steam. When he touched the scales of her back with his bare skin, he
yelped. They were hot, painfully hot. Days, probably.
I do not know if I can fly for days at this speed.
'You flew that far when we crossed the Worldspine.' Not at this speed though.
Nor was I poisoned.
Self-pity? Kemir felt his anger return, and this time it was all his own. 'No, but you weren't so
fat with people you weren't supposed to eat either. You brought this on yourself. Now you can
get out of it.'
They challenged me, Kemir. Two more scorpion bolts flew past Snow in quick succession. A
third glanced off her scales. She turned again, changing course to fly parallel to the
Worldspine. Kemir tried to work out whether they were going the right way. 'The last time we
flew towards the sea, we kept the mountains on the right.' Snow had turned so they were on
her left.
Yes, Kemir. And we have crossed the mountains now.
He tried to work out whether that made a difference. He didn't get very far before Snow
suddenly dropped out of the sky and plunged towards the ground. Kemir screamed, partly in
surprise, partly from real fear that Snow had suddenly succumbed to the poisoned bolts.
I do not feel the poison yet, Kemir. Her thoughts were tinged with amusement. If it is to be
the sea then I must fly low to weave among the hills. The dragons that follow us are fully
grown. They are stronger and faster than me, but I am more agile. We must use that to our
advantage.
We. Snow had never said we before. Despite everything, despite the burned town, despite
even Nadira, a warm glow bloomed in the pit of Kemir's stomach. We. It might have been his
breakfast trying to escape as Snow pitched into free fall. Or it might have been pride.

33

The Fortunes of War
Luck.
Prince Sakabian couldn't believe what he was seeing. He hadn't expected to find them. He was
high up on the edge of the Purple Spur, cruising along the edge of the Great Cliff with the
jagged peaks of the Spur to one side and the great grey emptiness of the Plains of Ancestors
far, far below on the other. He hadn't expected any trouble at all. And yet there they were, far
off and high over the desert plains. Eight of them. Six hunters and two war-dragons. The air
was so clear and dry that even from this distance he could make out what they were. He
looked over his right shoulder. Twenty-five war-dragons filled the air behind him, stretched
out in a line. On their backs were nearly a hundred dragon-knights. They had scorpions and
fire-bombs. Enough to start a war. The Red Riders were supposed to be far away, deep in the
Worldspine harassing Valmeyan. Sakabian was in the wrong place and everyone knew it. He
was here to watch the northern edges of the Spur, keeping an eye on the speaker's borders and
the alchemists' precious convoys travelling along the Evenspire Road.
And yet there they were. Eight dragons, mostly hunters. They hadn't come from Evenspire
and that only left one thing. The Red Riders weren't in the Worldspine after all. They were
here.
Luck.
That's what Knight-Marshal Aktark would say. That's what everyone would say. No matter
that the Red Riders had struck here before. No matter that another dozen wagons from the

secret mountain strongholds of the alchemists were on their way. Luck, they would say. No
one would give him the credit. No one would praise his astute tactical acumen, his precise
prediction of where the Red Riders would strike again. They would just say it was luck.
So be it. The queen - he still couldn't help but think of her as his
The Fortunes of War
queen, even now — the queen would see a victory. He doubted she would care how it was
won.
The queen. Even thinking about her made him stir. Aunt Zafir. He could hardly hear her name
without thinking of her naked. Without seeing her in his mind, slowly slipping out of the
darkness and into his bed, arching her back as he spread her legs. Unwed. Her lover crippled
and a traitor. You could see the hunger in her. She was ripe, ripe to be ploughed by any prince
who brought her a victory, especially a prince of her own blood. He let that thought spur him
on even as a new possibility presented itself. Back home in the Pinnacles, his father and
Queen Zafir's sister were already manoeuvring against each other to take her crown. The
family was tearing itself in half again. He could stop that. Yes. Perhaps a victory here could
win him a crown as well. He'd be quite happy enough to help himself to Zafir's little sister and
share a throne with her as long as he got a taste of the bigger sister too ... The two sides of the
family united again. A new lover, one safe and bound by blood. Two birds killed with a single
stone. Yes ...
He wrenched his thoughts away from the taste of Zafir's skin on his tongue. The battle had to
be won first. There was little point trying to hide his approach. They were in open skies and
clear air and if the other riders hadn't seen him already, they certainly would as soon as he
broke away from the cover of the Great Cliff. It would be a chase. In a chase, a war-dragon
always beat a hunter. The six hunters might as well give up now. At worst, if he was
blisteringly stupid, the two war-dragons might get away; but that would still give him the first
and the biggest victory that Zafir had seen for a long time. He would take it to her and bow,
and her eyes would sparkle at the understanding of his lust.
Ripe to be ploughed. He shifted in his saddle, trying to get comfortable.
The dragon beneath him surged through the air and shrieked, echoing the desire in his
thoughts. Behind him his riders fell into formation, fanning out to the left and the right, above
and below, with Sakabian at the point.
Like a spear to be plunged into my enemy's heart. The Red Riders had seen him. Their
hunters were fleeing, losing height and pulling away for now, but he didn't let that worry
him. Deep in the mountains they might have found a place to hide, but here in the barrens
there was nothing. No cliffs, no canyons, no crevasses, no great rivers, no titanic forests. A
sheer wall almost a mile high marked the start of the deep mountains and they were far too
low to find an escape route there. The Silver River valley was half a day of flying away. No,
there was nothing for them. He had half a mile of height over them, and height could become
speed whenever he wanted. They were doomed. The only shelter was in the Spur, and
Sakabian was in the way. Their cries echoed through the air. They might as well have been
cries of despair.
A part of him hoped they'd fly north. That was worth a try. They could make a dash for
Evenspire and the shelter of the treacherous Queen Almiri and her riders. For the hunters that
was hopeless. Evenspire was simply too far away. They would never reach it before Sakabian
was on them. For the two war-dragons, though, if they were strong ...
And if they do then I will take their hunters and I will follow them to Almiri's eyrie, and I will
loose my scorpions and rain down my bombs, for then there will be no doubt that we are at
war ... That was what the speaker wanted. An excuse. Anyone could see it. Yes, I could give
her that too.

But they did the more obvious thing. They turned west and sprinted for the Silver River and
the Worldspine from which it came. Sakabian changed his course, trying to be patient,
knowing that the dragons were ultimately his. Their only real hope was to reach the
mountains, so he kept in their way, blocking them off, drifting away from the Great Cliff as
he herded them further north and west, slowly trading his own height for the distance between
them. Eventually the hunters would tire and then even the mountains would be useless to
them. Then he would take them.
If I haven't taken them already.
They danced together, Sakabian and his twenty-five against eight, wearing them down until
everything was perfectly poised and the inevitable outcome was assured.
He never even saw the other dragons. They must have been lurking beyond the sheer walls of
the Spur. They came from behind and from high above, and with such speed and in such
numbers that half his riders were dead before he even knew he was
under threat. One instant he was sizing up the moment, readying himself to commit to the
attack. The next his mount was streaking down, while the air filled with shrieks and fire and
howling wind. Dragons smashed together around him. Riders were crushed between them or
else ripped from their saddles and tossed away to plunge the half-mile to the ground below.
Half a man sailed past Sakabian's head, fragments of armour spinning lazily around him.
Sometimes, when men and saddles were torn apart, it wasn't leather and metal that gave way
but flesh and bone, and Zafir's harnesses were the finest.
With no idea how he was alive, he slowed his precipitous dive, signalling for a fighting
retreat, but there was no one to rally. Dragons wheeled everywhere. Only six of his remained
and they were scattering and badly outnumbered. He couldn't count how many dragons had
attacked him. Dozens. They were all over the place now, most of them hunting down his own,
some of them still circling above. Doing to him exactly what he'd been planning to do to the
Red Riders.
He saw the hunters too, the ones he'd thought would be his. From underneath, the colours
painted on their bellies and their tails cried of Evenspire. Of Almiri the traitor queen. They
weren't the Red Riders after all. Almiri had lured him into a trap. He felt a surge of
something. Of awe perhaps. This meant war, open bloody war. At least half the dragons of
Evenspire were here, killing his men.
A rider never abandoned his dragon. That was the rule. Never, never, never. A rider always
fought to the death rather than lose his mount because, in the end, dragons were more
precious. Every prince knew that. And since when dragon-knights fought they fought in the
air, in heavy harnesses and armour, it all seemed rather inevitable. But I am a prince! Dying
hardly seemed fair. He was young, strong, virile. He didn't deserve to die. An hour earlier, in
his mind at least, he'd almost become both a king and a lover.
Almiri's riders were around him now, slowly closing in, keeping their distance but forcing
him towards the ground. Three still circled above, waiting lor him to flee. They were high
enough, he judged. High enough to turn their height into speed and be sure to catch him no
matter where he went.
Ancestors! Were they offering quarter?
Yes, he realised, that's exactly what they were doing. And why should he go down fighting?
The end would be exactly the same, after all. Except if he fought, he would be dead.
And if I'm taken ? Almiri will crow and Zafir will seethe. My brothers will pay the price for
our humiliation. My father will pay my ransom and will never sit on the throne of the
Pinnacles, and I will be sent into exile. The queen will spit in my face — if she can even bring
herself to look at me. No. My life will be finished.
Except...

He plunged down, straight to the ground, tearing open the buckles on his harness as they fell.
No cover for dragons among the stones and the dust and the thorn bushes but plenty enough
for a man. As soon as he reached the ground, he slid down off the dragon's back and shouted
at it to move away. Then he ran for the nearest shred of cover, covered himself in his dragonscale as best he could and prayed.
Let me survive. Let me take the word back to my queen. Let her know from my lips of the
traitor queen's outrage. Perhaps Zafir would give him dragons again, more dragons. Perhaps
she'd let him burn Evenspire to ash. Perhaps she might be seduced by his bravery.
They burned him. More than once they caught him with their fire, but they never quite
seemed to see him and his armour held off the flames. Luck. Sixty dragons and their riders
and he'd escaped them! When the sun began to set and they finally flew away, all he felt was
relief and a great deal of pain. He didn't care any more whether Zafir ever spoke to him again.
He was alive, that was all. For a brief few hours he saw himself for what he was. A fool.
But not for long. He walked through the night until he was half dead from pain and
exhaustion. His left his armour behind him, and then everything but his sword, and then even
that, so that when he found his way to the Evenspire Road, he was reduced to common
thievery. Still, he could barely contain himself. He slept in the day in what shade he could
find until the wagons he'd come out here to protect rolled past. What was left of them, for
Almiri's riders had already caught them and very politely stripped them of everything the
alchemists carried. They gave him what he needed
— water, food and a horse — and he was on his way, racing ahead of them.
It took him another four days to reach the Adamantine Palace. By then he'd traded his horse
for a thoroughbred. He'd survived. He would be the one to tell the queen about Almiri's
wickedness and give her the excuse for the war that she so clearly craved. He would be a
hero. He would bring her victory, of a sort. And she would be grateful. Oh so grateful.
In the palace he dressed himself as a prince once more. He insisted on an audience with the
speaker and he told her how he'd been surrounded on three sides by Almiri and the Red
Riders. He spoke of how valiantly his men had fought and how many of the enemy had been
slain. Of how he'd been ripped from his own mount as they'd skimmed the ground. Of how
he'd been burned and left for dead and yet, by some miracle, had survived his fall. In broken
whispers he told of how they'd hunted him for three days before he'd made his escape. He
could see the glee in the speaker's face when he told her of Evenspire's treachery, the sparkle
in her eyes, the burning heat of desire. He saw the slight hint of a smile, the licking of her lips
as she sent him away with words full of promise and hints of reward.
It came that night. The Night Watchman brought it to him with a pair of heavy hammers.
They smashed his ankles and his wrists and then broke his spine and cut out his tongue. Then
they put him in a cage and hung him next to Shezira's rotting remains to die slowly in the sun.
Speaker Zafir watched them hoist him up. She spat on the ground beneath him and then left.
She didn't even say anything.
Luck.

34

All at Sea
The test, Kemir discovered, was not between the dragons to see who could stay in the air the
longest. The test was between the riders. The test was to see who didn't mind pissing and

shitting in their breeches, who didn't mind sleeping on the wing, who didn't mind not eating or
drinking for day after day. The test was who could put up with more pain.
On even terms, Kemir could have lived with that. Dragon-riders were perfumed and pampered
and had servants to do all their work for them. Outsiders, on the other hand, were as tough as
nails, or at least that was how Kemir saw the world. Dragon-riders cried like babies if they got
hungry. Outsiders didn't even think about going a few days without food. That was simply the
way life was when you tried to live off the land in the mountains. He would be hungry and
thirsty and stiff and sore, but nothing worse than he'd suffered a dozen times before and
certainly nowhere near as bad as crossing the Worldspine had been. The dragon saddles were
comfortable enough, designed for long days of flight. He even managed to doze on Snow's
back in the freezing wind of their passage through the afternoon. When he woke up though,
Valmeyan's riders were still there. It occurred to him then that they'd come prepared. That
they probably had water and food for days of flight, and that he didn't.
Do not trouble yourself, Kemir. They pit their endurance against mine. They cannot win.
'Yes.' His head was already aching from the constant cold wind and a growing thirst and it
was only going to get worse. His nose throbbed, but the wind was the worst, a relentless
battering gale as the dragons raced for hour after hour, skimming the ground, zig-ging and
zagging between hills and through valleys. Their pursuers took it in turns to follow Snow
while one of them always stayed
high, watching so that she could never slip away. Despite the wind, Kemir was sweating.
Snow's scales were too hot to touch.
As the sun sank lower and the clouds on the horizon began to look like bruises, Valmeyan's
riders closed in on Snow for one last charge, harrying her even closer to the ground with their
scorpions. Kemir watched lakes and rivers and trees and empty meadows flash past beneath
beneath them, sotlose that Snow's tail sometimes threw up clouds of spray or earth.
'Land!' he told her. 'Find a cave or something like that where they can't shoot at you and land.'
I do not see any vast and gaping caves, Kemir, but I do see lakes. Plenty of lakes.
'Caves are better.'
Snow didn't answer. She headed further towards the mountains and wove back and forth
around a forest of craggy hills, ducking between bluffs, diving in and out of narrow valleys,
switching back and launching an attack or two of her own, although she never got close
enough to snatch a rider. Finally, as twilight fell, the other dragons dropped back and stopped
firing their scorpions, either because they'd run out of bolts or because they didn't trust their
eyes in the gloom. Snow resumed her course towards the sea; the others followed more
discreetly now, a mile or two away, slowly vanishing into the darkening sky.
'You can lose them in darkness, can't you?' he shouted hopefully. He bounced up and down,
trying to fight off the stiffness threatening to seize hold of his lower back. The pain in his
head was getting to be unbearable. He felt sick, physically sick. Please say yes. I don't have
the strength for this any more. Not again. Not after the Worldspine.
The dragons will sense where I am.
'How can they see you if it's dark?'
I did not say see, I said sense. They will feel the presence of my thoughts. Escape is not likely.
Snow started to climb. We do not like to fly in the dark. Perhaps the other dragons will refuse
to continue.
Kemir hunched over Snow's back, trying to sleep. His head was thumping and his tongue was
starting to stick to the back of his throat. 'I need water, Snow. I think I'm going to die,' he
whis-pered, but the dragon didn't seem to hear him and he fell back to
dozing. As the full dark of night began to fall, Snow flew lower. She changed her course and
started to follow a river that snaked along a valley filled with pines.

Kemir jerked awake. Snow's thoughts had changed. They felt bright and sharp and full of
victory. The dragons may sense where I am, but their riders will not. Ready yourself.
'Ready myself for what,' slurred Kemir.
To jump.
'What?'
You are getting off. There is water here to drink. You may find food. You will sleep and be
refreshed. In the morning I will find you and we will fly to the sea together.
'What about the other dragons?'
They will come for me, not for you. In the darkness their riders will not be able to use their
weapons against me. For a while I shall hunt them. If I succeed, they will be gone by dawn.
She slowed, dropping lower and lower until she was skidding across the surface of the river,
wings flapping furiously, sending great waves across the water, flying as slowly as a dragon
could fly without simply falling out of the air. Jump! Now!
Undoing the saddle took five times longer than it should have done and then Kemir was
falling, rolling over Snow's scales, bouncing off her shoulder, tumbling, splashing into the
water. The cold river shocked him awake, but he barely had time to get his bearings before
Snow powered away and the wind from her wings grabbed his head and pushed him under the
water. He came up spluttering, thrashing his arms and legs wildly. Half a lifetime ago he'd
learned to swim so that he could dive for lake stones to trade. He was exhausted though. His
boots and his sword belt were dragging him back down. He managed to ditch the belt, but the
boots were another matter and he was loath to throw away either of the dragon-bone bows.
And then there was the armour. / should have thought about this before Snow threw me off...
And then, to his surprise, his feet were on the bottom. He was standing up and the river water
only reached to his shoulders. He struck for the shore. The water was icy, soaking through his
riding clothes as though they weren't there, making him bulky and
clumsy. By the time he reached the bank he was trembling, teeth chattering. But alive.
Water. And shelter. Before he froze. He took out his arrows and filled his quiver with river
water. As he did, he saw two of the pursuing dragons soar overhead, side by side, black
shapes against the night sky. Kemir winced and ducked. Once they were gone, he jogged
along the bank to where a fallen tree lay with its roots sticking up in the air and started to strip
off his wet clothes. There was a scar in the ground where the earth had been ripped open by
the tree's roots as it fell. He tried to ignore how tired he was, fobbing off the fatigue and the
exhaustion with promises that they could have him later. As long as they let him do what he
needed to do to stay alive.
He threw the last of his clothes onto the ground. He was shivering uncontrollably now.
Memories of Nadira kept bothering him, although whether that was because he needed
someone else's warmth or because he might be seeing her again soon, he wasn't sure. He
started shovelling pine needles into a mound, scrabbling for handfuls wherever he could find
them. She could have helped him with this too.
He ran out of strength long before his pile of needles was as big as he wanted it to be. More
would have been better, but there was nothing for it. He tipped some into the hole, climbed in
and pulled the rest on top.
'Forest blanket,' he whispered to himself. 'Have you never tried it?' His teeth were chattering.
As the lurking darkness took him, he could almost believe he wasn't alone any more. And
then he was gone.
He was awoken by snuffling. Warm, loud snuffling. I know you are here. I can feel your
thoughts.
He opened his eyes. It was still dark. A dragon was peering at him. A huge dragon. He
couldn't see what colour it was, but he was fairly sure it wasn't white.

'Snow?'
In the times we were first born this one had a different name. Now he is called Sunset.
Kemir didn't move, He couldn't. Overnight, his muscles all seemed to have turned to wood.
His face ached and his nose was
sore and swollen up like and egg. 'This ... is ... another dragon?' he hissed.
I told you I would hunt them. I have brought down one. The others evade me. Something
landed with a thud close to Kemir's head. This is the rider. I could not tell if he was poisoned
so I did not eat him. He has warm dry clothes. There is food here too.
Food. Kemir jumped out of his hole. He skirted nervously around the new dragon, but Sunset
only sniffed its dead rider and then eyed Kemir with dull curiosity. Both dragons were
deliciously warm. After a moment of hesitation, he started to relieve the dead man of his
clothes and his armour. The clothes were still warm too. Then he looked at Sunset.
He will not hurt you. There is food. You wish to eat. You must take what you can. More
dragons are coming. We must be on our way to the sea.
Kemir helped himself. The food was delicious. He felt new again.
You may ride Sunset if you wish. He is far from awakening.
'No thanks.' He climbed up into the saddle and kicked Snow in the neck. 'Come on then! Gee
up! How many dragons are after us now?'
Two remain. They will not catch us.
With food and water the rest of the journey wasn't so bad. Snow flew straight; the other
dragon flew behind her and the riders from the mountains kept their distance. Sometimes
when Kemir looked back he couldn't even see them. Then, hours later, they'd be back, little
dark specks against the high white haze of cloud. They never came close though, and after
another day and night of drifting high over the edge of the mountains, the Worldspine came to
an end. A very abrupt end, as though the ancient god who'd carved the landscape had simply
stopped and cut the rest away with a divine knife. Sheer cliffs plunged into the Sea of Storms,
and when Kemir looked to the east, to the depths of the mountains, he saw that the cliffs only
grew higher, until they rose from the sea for miles and vanished into the heavy clouds above.
As Snow flew out into the void between the grey and grumbling clouds and the churning
waters below, the last two dragons ended the pursuit.
They stopped at the cliff and perched on the rocks. Kemir watched them fade slowly into the
haze of the day. We have won, Kemir.
Kemir closed his eyes as they flew out to sea. The coast was barely visible. Snow climbed up
into the clouds, and Kemir couldn't see anything any more. The air was bitterly cold but at
least it was damp. He opened his mouth and wished it would rain. The water he'd taken from
the river was already gone.
'Where are you going?' Snow was turning back towards the coast.
Do you not wish to rest, Kemir? To eat and drin\ at your leisure? To lie with your limbs
outstretched? 'You bloody know I do.'
So do I. She powered in through the cloud. Kemir yawned. If the dragon wanted to go back to
the coast and land somewhere safe, that was fine. He slumped over Snow's shoulders and let
his mind wander through the memories that had brought him here. He thought of Sollos and
of the dragons that had burned his home. Of Snow burning the alchemists out of their caves.
Of Nadira. Of Rider Semian, whose sword had ended Sollos. Of his own shrieks of rage. Of
sitting astride Snow as she hurtled through the air. He dreamed of the wind in his face, a great,
howling wind ...
They were falling out of the sky. He blinked awake and tried to move, and the wind almost
ripped him out of his harness. Snow had tucked in her wings. She was falling straight down
like a monstrous arrow from the heavens, and Sunset was beside her. The black stone

landscape of the cliffs was rushing up towards him. Kemir opened his mouth to shout, to
scream, anything, but the wind tore his breath away. He couldn't even breathe.
hook.
He could barely open his eyes, but now at least he had a proper dragon-rider's helm. He pulled
down the visor and looked. The two dragons who'd followed them to the sea were still there
and Snow was diving at them.
Breathe! He forced his chest to motion. Breathe! 'What are you doing?'
These ones will be slow and stupid just as you have become, and I am hungry. I do not think
there is nuuh food in this sea.
'There are fish.'
I do not think I am well equipped for catching fish.
The ground was coming up. Kemir clenched his fists and gritted his teeth, and then Snow
spread out her wings and threw Kemir forward with such force that he hit his head on her
scales and knocked himself out. When he came to, Snow had landed. Kemir touched his
forehead. His fingers came away bloody. His face was agony. His nose was probably ruined
forever.
You knew what I meant to do, chided Snow. You should have been ready.
'I was ready.'
Obviously not ready enough. She had a dragon-rider in her mouth. As Kemir pulled his
groggy thoughts together, she crunched on the knight and swallowed him in one gulp, armour
and all.
'Stupid dragon, impatient as ever. He was probably poisoned, you know.' He could hear
whimpering and wailing from somewhere.
No, he was not. I asked before I ate him.
'How very civilised. And what makes you think that whatever he told you was the truth?'
Definitely whimpering. Someone was still alive, begging for mercy. Kemir peered down,
trying to see the ground below Snow's bulk.
He did not tell me anything with his words, Kemir, except how terrified he was. But I saw in
his mind. No secret joy, no hidden victory. Only the understanding of certain death and his
own futility. He had not taken poison like the ones before. Snow licked her lips. Bitter. I
prefer them better fed.
'I'm sure the others will taste better.' Two dragons meant four riders, didn't it? His head was
throbbing badly. And his nose. Most of him, in fact.
I barely noticed. These dragons carry food and water too. You should take it.
'Do I have to?' He didn't feel so hungry now, only sleepy.
There will be no more for many days. I will take your guidance, Kemir. I must wait for these
dragons to awaken, and so we will fly out over the sea where none of your kind will find us.
They will look for us but they will find nothing. We will seek land again far away from here.
Until then we will starve.
'Great.' The effort of getting off Snow's back and rummaging around the other dragons for
food seemed impossible. Snow might as well have asked him to scale the cliffs.
It is fortunate that I fed so well before this chase began, Kemir, is it not?
'Whatever.' Wearily, Kemir unstrapped himself. He put his hand to his head again. The wound
was still bleeding, and he had a lump the size of an egg right between his eyes. 'What do you
make your scales out of?'
Whatever we eat, Kemir.
He turned around to slide off Snow's shoulder and staggered as he landed, dizzy and close to
collapse. If he was really lucky, one of the dragons would catch him with an idle swish of its
tail, shatter every bone in his body and send him flying over the edge of the cliff. Where the
sea would then smash what was left of him into a sticky mess to be slowly eaten by crabs.

He sat down heavily and rubbed his head again.
'I hate you,' he grumbled. Then he saw that Snow had a last rider trapped under her front claw.
Still alive.
Take the food and water, Kemir. Eat, drink and sleep.
Kemir glanced at the trapped rider. 'What about that one?'
We are bringing this one with us. This one is useful.
'Useful?' Kemir moved closer. 'How?' He stopped. The dragon-rider had lost his helm. Her
helm. Long hair straggled out between Snow's claws. He caught a glimpse of her face.
Terrified.
This one knows where other dragons may be found.
Kemir blinked. The dragon-rider's eyes caught his. Pleading. He'd seen that look too many
times before. It made him hate her.
'Give her to me and I'll make her talk right enough. Then I can tell you everything you need.
You can have her back when I'm done if you must.' As Snow lifted her claw, he stepped
forward, pulled the dragon-rider to her feet and threw her down again. Hard. Then he was on
her. He punched her several times in the face, bloodied his knuckles, but somehow that wasn't
anywhere near enough; he started ripping off her armour, tearing at the clothes underneath,
swearing and screaming at her while Snow watched over his shoulder. The dragon-rider didn't
even fight back that much. She snuggled, but most of her whimpers were pain. Snow
had already broken one of her legs, maybe done more. He had her armour mostly off, was all
ready to tear open the soft flying shirt she wore underneath when the dragon stopped him
dead.
Why?
'What?'
Why, Kemir?
Revenge, that was why. Revenge for all the men and women raped and enslaved by the
mountain king's riders. It wasn't about lust or desire or need, just cold and bloody and vicious
revenge. Mostly what he wanted was to rip her to pieces with his bare hands. Not for anything
he knew she'd done, but simply for what she was.
You see, Kemir. Do you see now? That your kind are all the same? That there are no
differences between you.
Kemir spun around to glare at Snow. 'Yes, there are! These riders come and—' He wasn't
allowed to finish.
A human is a human. Some are taller, some are shorter, some are darker, some are lighter, but
on the inside do not tell me you are different. This one is useful. When this one has told us
what it knows, it will no longer be useful. Then you may mate with her in any way you wish;
but for now you will stop. For now you will leave this one alone. Eat. Drink. And then we
will leave.
Angrily, Kemir did as he was told. When he was done, Snow gently gripped the rider in her
claws and took to the air again, and the other dragons followed. It was true that Kemir felt a
lot better for having some bread and water inside him. He had no idea where they were going
and his head and his nose still hurt like buggery. But they were alive. The King of the Crags
had come after them and they'd bloodied his nose too. Nine riders dead, one rider and three
dragons taken. That was a start, wasn't it?
He closed his eyes. He tried not to think about the town Snow had burned. He tried not to
think about the people who had lived there: the men who had simply wanted to feed their
families, the women who only wanted to see their sons grow into men, the children who—
The children who might have one day grown to be alchemists, poisoning my kind with their
potions? The women who bear dragon-rider sons? The men who build their castles and forge
their swords and harvest their food? Do not say they have done nothing, Kemir.

They sheltered under the wings of the dragon-lords and in turn the dragon-lords stood on their
backs. Perhaps that ought to have been enough. Perhaps Snow was right. Or perhaps not.
Perhaps Snow was wrong and they really had done nothing. Either way, Nadira was not one
of them. You shouldn't have eaten her.
And you should not have tried to force yourself on this female, Kemir, yet you did. Why?
Because it is the essential naturt of your kjnd, that is why. You are what you are and so am I.
The dragon-rider. He'd almost forgotten that he'd tried to rape her. Would have raped her if
Snow hadn't stopped him. Vaguely he knew that it would have been wrong. Sollos would
have stopped him too. But somehow he couldn't find any feelings of regret. No remorse. Not
much of anything. When the dragons had finished with her, he'd probably settle for killing
her. That would do. Would probably be a mercy by then.
Wasn't that what Snow had said about Nadira? That she wanted to die?
Do you know how many dragons fly at the command of King Valmeyan, Kemir? I know that
you do not, but I see the answer in the thoughts of this rider. Four hundred and then more,
Kemir. Knowledge that is useful. We have taken but three today. Do not waste your thoughts
on that which you cannot change. Dwell on that which you can. Think on that, Kemir. Three
is a beginning, nothing more.
We. She had said 'we' again. Kemir tried to think about the town, about Nadira, but the
memories kept sliding away. He looked left and right at the three dragons flying alongside
Snow, one a mustard yellow, another a sooty grey who reminded him of a dragon he'd seen
somewhere before, and Sunset, a gleaming ruddy brown. Yes, it was a beginning. A
beginning of what, though?
As he wondered, unease settled deep into his bones. Am I becoming like her? Or was I always
this way?

35

The Heart and the Head
Jehal leaned into his walking staff. At least he could walk now, even if one of his legs was
still next to useless and every step made him wince. Jeiros wanted him back in bed, numb
with Dreamleaf, but Jehal had had enough of both. He hauled himself out of the Tower of
Dusk and found no guards on the doors to stop him. No Adamantine Men in sight at all except
for a few up on the walls. He stopped at the doors, half afraid to step out into the Gateyard.
The sunlight was overwhelming. So bright.
This won't do. He forced himself out into the light. Someone finally noticed him. They ran
away. Presumably off to tell someone else. Maybe I'm still a prisoner after all. Well I might as
well stay here and see who comes. I'm hardly about to run off anywhere.
He wasn't disappointed. After he'd sat in the sun for ten minutes, idly watching the men on the
walls, the Night Watchman himself strode into the Gateyard. He looked haggard and a lot
older than a few weeks ago. He stopped in front of Jehal and bowed.
'Forgive me if I don't rise, Night Watchman.' Jehal smiled as pleasantly as he could bear. 'I
seem to be inconvenienced in that respect.'
'I wish you a full and speedy recovery, Your Highness.' Vale's face was as flat and unreadable
as it always was.
'I'm sure you do. You know what? I think I might get up anyway. I think I might like to take
in the view from the Gatehouse.' And why did I say that? Now I have to walk across a quarter
of the palace and climb more than a hundred steps, which I'm clearly not capable of doing.

Vale offered his hand. Jehal waved it away and struggled to his feet on his own. The Night
Watchman's face didn't change. 'If you like, I can put one of my men at your disposal to help
you.'
Bastard. 'No, thank you, Night Watchman. It is not as bad as it
The Heart and the Head
seems.' And now I have to get to the Gatehouse all on my own. Still, it is going to be worth it.
Vale gave a deferential shrug. 'I am inclined to applaud, Your Highness. It is wise to exercise
an injury as soon as it is ready.'
'I do not require your applause, Night Watchman. If you wish to help in that regard, you can
send some of your very fine whores to my bed.'
'Ah, that I could, but Speaker Zafir has commented more than once that overexertion may
simply mean you take longer to heal, Your Highness. In that particular regard, I have heard
rumour that Prince Tichane is looking after your interests and doing so very well. I won't
pretend to understand what that is supposed to mean.'
'Really?' Vishmir's cock you don't. But you don't know that I'm watching her. You don't know
about my little mechanical dragons. In fact there's rather a lot you don't know ...
Vale gave a nonchalant shrug. 'Perhaps that means he will be supplying ladies to your bed
when you are well enough to enjoy them.' He smiled faintly. 'Or perhaps you used to have
some whore and now he's looking after her for you. Such things are hardly my concern so I
give them no thought.'
Jehal fumed. 'Night Watchman, if I ordered you to be still so I could hobble over and break
your nose, I suppose you'd comply without hesitation?'
'My nose is of little value to the realms and has been broken many times before. Consider it
yours.'
'Then I shall treasure it like a gem.' And cut it off one day. 'If I'm a prisoner, I shall simply
return to my tower. I wouldn't wish to embarrass you.' His eyes narrowed and he watched the
Night Watchman carefully. Tra sure I seem harmless enough, but you never know quite what
might happen if you allow one of your prisoners to roam. I might roam to your brothel and
overexert myself or something equally terrible. Who knows — I might push someone off a
balcony.'
The smallest flicker of a shadow crossed Vale's face. That was enough. Inside, Jehal smiled.
Vale turned away. 'The speaker has not withdrawn her order regarding your confinement, but
she has since ordered Jeiros and
the alchemists to care for you as best they can. We shall call this exercise a part of your
rehabilitation. I shall escort you myself.'
'Very kind of you.' Jehal found he couldn't resist. 'But are you sure you can spare the time?
You look like you've just got out of bed.'
'I apologise if my appearance troubles you, Your Highness.' They began to walk towards the
Gatehouse. 'The tension in the realms has grown a great deal of late. I have been busy.'
Walking across the Gateyard and climbing the steps to the top of the Gatehouse ought to have
taken a few minutes. By the time Jehal got there, he'd spent the hardest half-hour he could
remember. He was soaked in sweat, his leg was in silent shrieking agony and he was ready to
collapse. The Night Watchman didn't say a word, didn't offer to help. It was almost as though
he understood the necessity of what Jehal was doing.
He smelled Shezira before he saw her. The cages where she and Valgar hung were not far
from the gates, suspended from huge poles. There wasn't much left of either of them but it
was a warm day and the wind wasn't in the mood to spare Jehal's nose. By the time he reached
the top, he was ready to retch. He made himself stand and stare at them both anyway.
Somehow he found it satisfying. In a sort of I'm-alive-and-you're-not kind of way.

There was a third cage too. The man inside was ... Ancestors! He's still alive. Barely. 'I see
you've strung up another one. What did this one do?'
Vale pursed his lips. 'Hasn't Jeiros told you? That's Prince Sakabian. He lost twenty-five of
the speaker's dragons to the traitor queen and had the audacity to survive. Then he was witless
enough to return with his tale.'
Jehal's lip curled. 'Zafir would prefer he'd died or never returned, and her twenty-five dragons
had simply disappeared into the mountains without a trace, would she?' Twenty-five! What a
blow! She must be desperate! He tried to hide his glee. Desperate was good. Desperate was
very good. 'And Almiri did that? Good for her. If a bit stupid. Let me guess, she's demanding
a trade. The dragons Zafir seized on the Night of the Knives for the ones Almiri now holds at
Evenspire.'
'I wouldn't know.' Vale's brow furrowed. 'Why did you come
up here, Prince Jehal?' He seemed genuinely surprised, even a little pitying. You're slipping,
Vale. At least now I know how things stand.
'You think I'm going to be out there in a cage of my own soon, do you?'
'I cannot read the speaker's mind, Your Highness. I simply obey the orders I am given.' Oh but
you want me out there, don't you? Just like you wanted Shezira out there. You're going to be
in for such a disappointment.
'Actually, I didn't much want to come here. I wanted you to come here. I wanted to watch you
here, seeing this. That's why I came up here.' Yes. Such a disappointment. And now the fun
starts.
'I see this every day, Your Highness.'
'And you'll see it every day for weeks to come and I'm sure there will be more. But from
tomorrow you'll see it in a different light. I know why you wanted Shezira dead. I know you
let her go to Hyram to try and make some sort of peace with him when you should have
confined her to her tower.'
Vale didn't flinch. 'Shezira had already gone to Speaker Hyram when my men reached her
tower.'
Jehal cocked his head. 'That is a lie, Night Watchman.'
'That is the truth, Your Highness. The lie comes from whoever told you otherwise.'
'No.' Jehal laughed. 'No one told me otherwise, Night Watchmen. I saw it for myself.'
Vale's turn to laugh. 'You could not, Prince Jehal. You were far across the palace in the Tower
of Air. You could not have seen what you claim from there.'
'Is that so?' Jehal's grin spread across his face. 'I'm afraid you are much mistaken, Night
Watchmen. I had eyes all over the palace that night and not all were men. I came up here
because I have something to show you.' Slowly, he unwrapped a strip of white silk from
around his wrist. 'I know you can keep a secret, Night Watchman. This is a treasure that the
Taiytakei gave to me for my wedding, and that I, in turn, gave to the speaker as a sign of my
devotion and my trust.'
He held out the silk. Vale looked at it, obviously puzzled. 'Forgive me. Prince Jehal, but I
don't understand. What are you showing me?'
'A piece of silk, Night Watchman. Tie it across your eyes. I would sit down first, if I were
you. Disorientation is a common first experience.' He watched Vale hesitate. 'I'm hardly in a
position to run away.'
The Night Watchman laughed. 'Run away? Prince Jehal, I wouldn't put it past you. I'm more
concerned at receiving a knife in my ribs.'
'I'm not really a knife person, Night Watchman. When I have an enemy to deal with, I prefer
to watch them build their own pyre and then linger powerless on top of it for a while while I
play carelessly with matches beneath.' He gave Vale a toothy smile. 'Put it on. You'll see
through the eyes of... of something else. I will not tell you what.'

Slowly, the Night Watchman put the silk to his eyes, although he held it with his hands and
didn't tie it. He didn't wobble or stagger either. Impressed? I suppose I have to be.
'What do you see?'
'An eyrie.' Vale took the cloth away from his eyes. 'Drotan's Top. From the top of Hyram's
Tor.'
'Yes, you did. And on the Night of the Knives when I put that silk to my eyes, do you know
what I saw? I saw you, Night Watchman. I saw you let Shezira go when you should have
seized her.'
Vale paled. A crac\ in your armour at last.
'Yes, Night Watchman, I really did see it all. You let Shezira go.'
'It was for the good of the realms.' His voice had gone husky.
'Didn't really work out that way, did it? Do you want to know something else? It might make
you feel a bit better. After all, this is Zafir's toy not mine. I'm imagining she saw everything
too.'
'She never said ...'
'She never said anything about you disobeying her direct order? It did all turn out rather nicely
in her favour.' Jehal shrugged. 'Mind you, letting Shezira go was clear disobedience and I
think we both know that our speaker doesn't take too well to being disobeyed. Maybe she
wasn't watching after all. I'll ask her, if you like.' He cocked his head in mock surprise. 'How
interesting that might be. Tell me, Night Watchman: did every single witness among your
men die that night ?'
'No, Prince Jehal, they did not. I do not waste my own men. They are posted where they will
do no harm.' Vale sounded like he was chewing on gravel.
'Good for you.' Jehal smiled. 'Now shall I tell you something else?' He nodded over the wall
towards the cages. 'I saw Hyram go over the balcony with the same eyes that saw you betray
your speaker. Shezira never touched him. You beheaded an innocent queen.'
'I followed the speaker's orders.'
'You should really make up your mind, Night Watchman. Are you a guardian of the realms
with a sacred duty to preserve our peace and our way of life? Or are you a man who does as
he's told, no matter what fool gives him his orders?'Jehal snorted. 'But no, we both know you
can't even do that right, can you?'
Vale's face didn't change. 'Should I tell Master Jeiros about the blood-mage who comes to see
you, Your Highness? It would probably be wise to consider his advice.'
Jehal shrugged. 'Why not tell the speaker as well?'
'I imagine she already knows.' He shrugged. 'We are the Adamantine Men, Your Highness.
We trace our traditions to the earliest days of the Embers. We were the first to rise up against
the blood-mages because we had nothing to lose. We were their fodder, their unwilling
sacrifices to the dragons. The Embers of today may choose their way, but the first
Adamantine Men did not. The alchemists guard the realms against the dragons now. The
dragon-kings guard against the alchemists, the speaker guards against the dragon-kings and
we guard against them all. We are the last resort, Your Highness. We guard against tyranny. It
is a precarious balance at best. People like you are anathema to me. Tell the speaker whatever
you wish.'
Jehal stared at Vale as he finished. 'You actually believe that, don't you?' He hauled himself
painfully to his feet. The Tower of Dusk felt a very long way away, but at least the stairs from
the gatehouse would be easier going down. 'I think I would like to go back to my prison now.
You can go first. Make sure you're ready to catch me. I wouldn't want to accidentally slip and
break my neck. Oh, and I think, on reflection, I shall go elsewhere for my whores. No offence,
Night Watchman, but 1 would prefer to be a little more certain of their qualities.'

Vale went wordlessly down. Jehal sat on the top step and slid down from one to the next.
Which hurt and made him look like an idiot, but he simply didn't have the strength to do
anything else. At the bottom the Night Watchman walked away and Jehal watched him go.
First blood was to you, Vale Tassan. But now you see what is coming and I promise all the
other victories will be mine. Every single petty little one of them, until tormenting you is
simply a bore.
First things first, though. He would see if this blood-mage could deliver on his promises. And
after that there was the little matter of heirs and whether he could still father them. Or at least
enjoy trying.

36

The Islands
The dragons flew for three more days, out across the sea, until they found land again. Kemir
had no idea where they were but he'd never been so happy to see a bare stretch of sand in his
life. He lay flat on his back, stretching muscles that he hadn't known he had.
We are hungry, Snow said. She dropped the half-dead dragon rider a hundred yards down the
beach. Then the dragons took off again. The wind of their wings blasted sand into Kemir's
face but he didn't notice because by then he was already asleep.
He woke up as the sun was sinking towards the horizon. Stiff as a board again. With creaking
joints, he got to his feet. He had no idea where he was. With Sollos, he'd travelled most of the
realms. They'd been to the edge of the stone desert to the north of Outwatch. They'd travelled
on the backs of dragons over the endless dunes of the Desert of Sand and the white flat
lifeless expanse of the Desert of Salt. They'd whored and fought their way through the hills
around Evenspire and the swamps and moors of the distant east. They'd travelled the length of
the Worldspine from north to south.
But I never crossed the sea. He sat up and looked at the sky, blue and clear. Waves rustled
softly at the edge of the sand, swishing back and forth. A gentle breeze blew, soft and warm.
A hundred feet the other way, away from the sea, the sand rose up into rolling humps. Dunes
covered in long spiky grasses. Beyond that, trees. Lots and lots of trees.
Trees meant game and game meant food. It would be dark soon and he was hungry. The
dragons had been gone for hours. He picked up his two bows and went over to the dragonrider. She hadn't moved. She was conscious though. Could have killed him in his sleep if
she'd had the presence of mind to get up and do it. Except when he peered Closer he wasn't
sure she had the presence of anything much any more. Her eyes rolled up into her head. She
moaned and groaned and had no idea who he was. Probably had no idea who she herself was
either. By the looks of her, she wasn't going to last for long. Not so useful after all.
There was a little stream running down the beach. Kemir followed it a little way inland and
found a pool. He drank and then brought back some water and tipped it down her throat.
Strange thing to do to someone you planned to kill. He mulled over doing just that, slitting her
throat here and now while the dragons were away. He wasn't sure whether he wanted to do
that because she was a dragon-rider, or whether it was some sort of daft jealousy. In the end
he put the thought away. Instead he did his best to make her comfortable and fed her some
more water.
'Sorry,' he whispered in her ear. Sorry for what he wasn't sure. For all sorts of things,
probably. For what he'd done, for what had happened. For what would happen later.

Then he looked out to sea and his mouth fell open. The dragons were there, maybe a mile out.
They were easy enough to spot. And they weren't alone. He watched as one of them seemed
to drag something through the waves towards the beach, flapping its wings furiously, almost
but not quite lifting whatever it was out of the water. After a few seconds, the dragon let go
and shot up into the air, only for another to take its place. Kemir watched as they came closer.
It had to be another dragon. Maybe one that was hurt. One with a broken wing. Although if it
was, they were being none too gentle with it.
I don't see any wings. Don't they put down dragons with broken wings? But what else can it
be? A sea monster? Whatever it was, it was black and bulky and about the size of a small
hunting dragon although with no wings and without the long tail or neck of a true dragon.
The dragons were getting closer. As they saw him, Snow tipped her wings in greeting. Food!
Food, Kemir! We have brought food! Giant fish!
Kemir's jaw dropped. It was whale. They had a whale.
The dragons splashed and floundered in the water, dragging the whale up onto the beach.
Great gouges had already been ripped from its flesh, and yet it wasn't quite dead. Kemir kept
well away
as the dragons finished it off and then tore it to pieces. They'd all been days without food. The
sight of it made him him both hungry and sick at the same time.
He walked back to the pool and washed himself. When he returned, the dragons were
sprawled in the sand. One of them belched. Half the whale was gone.
'I see you left some for me.' He wrinkled his nose. The air stank.
We will stay here now, Kemir. There is enough to eat.
'You've only got half a whale left. You'll be hungry again in the morning.'
This will satisfy us for days if we do not fly. If we grow hungry, we shall simply hunt more.
In all my many lives, I have never seen the sea with my own eyes. It is not so bad after all.
Kemir nodded. The stench was getting worse, strong enough to make him gag. 'You enjoy
yourselves then. I'll go hunt something more my size.'
I feel your hunger, Kemir. You may take from our kill.
'I'm honoured.' He wasn't sure that he particularly wanted to, but an offer to share food was a
meaningful thing among outsiders and to refuse was often an insult. Maybe dragons were
different. Or maybe not. 'Right then. Honoured then. Like I said.' Disgusted as well, but not
disgusted enough to offend something that could squash him flat without really noticing. With
a sigh, he drew out one of his knives and tried to work out how best to approach the whale.
Most of its head was missing, so it was a choice between its tail and its belly, where it had
been ripped open and its innards scattered across the sand.
'Tail,' he decided. 'When it comes to whales, we humans like the tail bits best.' Especially
when it's the part that's furthest away from all that ... mess. He held his breath. He'd hunted
and killed and eaten animals all his life, but never one whose corpse he could actually walk
inside.
Snow was laughing at him. You have never even seen these creatures before. You have barely
heard of them.
Kemir glared at her. 'Tail is still the best.' He started to cut off strips of meat, trying to hold
his nose at the same time.
Take as muck as you wish, [fier this, you will have to hunt for your-self, You cannot stay with
us. For a time, at least, we must be apart.
'What?' He stopped, frozen still. 'Why? Where are you going?' The thought of being left alone
out here scared him. Which was insane. He pinched himself. Nadira. Remember Nadira.
You must leave us here. We must be alone. Already my new brothers are beginning to dream,
Kemir. I have shown you those dreams. You have seen what they are and you have tasted how
they feel to us. You should not be here when the awakening begins. Remember Ash.

'Ash was deranged.'
Ash was angry. All of us are angry. When I awoke, I was angry. And you do not want to be
near when we are angry. I cannot promise they will not eat you. I cannot promise that I could
stop them.
Kemir snorted. 'Just tell them how useful I am.'
When the awakening has finished, I will reason with them. As I reasoned with Ash. Ash did
not eat you, Kemir. Despite his anger.
'Well then, fine. I'll just piss off into the middle of nowhere. On my own. Leave you to it.
Have fun and just see how far you get without me. Am I supposed to take your pet dragonrider with me and look after her for you?' He looked at Snow long and hard. She was still
changing. Still remembering. Still learning who she was. There hadn't been much time to
notice since ... since Nadira. Not until they'd reached the sea. But she was. She wasn't the
same Snow who'd burned the alchemists' redoubt, not the same dragon who'd eaten Nadira or
destroyed a city whose name she didn't even know. Maybe she really didn't need him any
more. He wasn't sure whether that was good or bad. 'There's one thing I want to know before I
go. What's your name, dragon?'
Snow, Kemir. It is Snow. Why do you ask when you know this?
'Not that name. Your real name. The name you were given when you were born for the very
first time.'
For a moment he could almost believe Snow was smiling. My hatching name. The name my
silver rider gave me. The first name I ever had. Is that what you want?
'Yes. Your first name or your real name or whatever it is. Not Snow. Not the one the
Outwatch alchemists gave you. Unless it's some secret and you're going to have to eat me if
you tell me.'
It is no secret. I was called Alimar Ishtan vei Atheriel — Beloved Memory of a Lover Distant
and Lost.'
Kemir stared at her and tried not to laugh. 'Beloved. That's ...
That's not a name I would have ever guessed. Alimar is better. Alim, maybe. Ali.'
You may know my true name, but you have not earned the right to speak Take whatever
meat you wish. And then you must go.
Kemir threw a glance down the beach at the dragon-rider, still lying in the sand. 'Fine with
me. So what about her?'
Snow moved over to the prone figure on the sand. She nudged the rider with her nose. Kemir
felt her disgust. This one is broken. Gingerly she picked the rider up by one leg and shook,
then dropped her again. This one will be gone before my kjn awake. She will stay. I will take
what I can while she lingers.
For a moment, Kemir hesitated. Maybe he should have killed the dragon-rider after all.
Maybe it would have been a mercy. Then he turned. 'All yours then. Farewell, dragon.' He
didn't look back.
When it is safe, I will find you.
'Only if I want you to, dragon. Only if I want you to.' With that he stalked away into the
foreign trees of a forest whose name he'd never hear. Alone. Snow had company now. Her
own kind. They didn't need him any more.
'Forget them,' he snapped to himself, as if that would be enough. 'They don't need you and
you don't need them.' Although, all things considered, it would have been nice to have been
abandoned somewhere that he knew. Or even somewhere that had people.
Still, alive was alive. Alive was something other than dead. And Snow hadn't eaten him after
all. He walked as far away from the dragons as he could be bothered to and built himself a
shelter. He could never walk far enough, of course, not when they had wings. Over the next
days he saw them sometimes, flying in the distance. He tried to ignore them, but as the days

stretched to weeks he couldn't. Food was plentiful, the hunting easy. He started to grow fat
with waiting. He gave up his first shelter and took to roaming the island, exploring as much as
anything for something to do. Sometimes even that wasn't enough. Sometimes he stared at the
skies for hours and hours, just hoping to catch a glimpse of wings and fire.
He'd been there for three weeks when he saw the ships. He was on the far side, as far away
from the dragons as he could get, and all of sudden he woke up in the morning and found the
sea full of ships. They were far awav, too far for him to signal, so he watched
and wondered who they were. The dragons must have seen the ships too. He saw them later
that morning, flying out across the sea. The sight made him glad that he was on land. Dragons
and ships didn't mix. Even he knew that. He didn't see what happened and didn't much care.
The next morning, though, they were waiting for him when he woke up. All four of them. He
should have known better than to think he could hide. He found himself looking for the
dragon-rider, but she wasn't there.
This one? The other three dragons looked different now. Full-grown war-dragons, they
dwarfed even Snow, and they were awake too. He could see it in them.
This one is useful to us. Snow turned her attention to Kemir. We are four now. We are strong.
We will return to free our kind, and you will help us.
'And how can I possibly help a dragon?'
Snow dropped something at his feet. A pack. The dragon-rider's pack. Ripped pages and maps
spilled out. The realms. No one had ever bothered teaching him to read or write, but he knew
a map when he saw one. With the desert up in the north, the moors to the east, the Worldspine
to the west ...
They are ... they are too small. And too fragile. You will hold them and you will look at them
and we will see through your eyes. He was suddenly aware of Snow, fiercely attentive to his
thoughts. At the same time he saw the little crosses marked on the Worldspine in a separate
hand, and realised what they were. A map of the Mountain King's eyries.
It shows where dragons can be found, does it not?
Kemir didn't answer. He didn't need to. His thoughts had already given him away. He could
feel Snow in his head, glittering with greed. A map of the Mountain King's eyries. Yes. He
could almost see them burn, one by one.
He didn't bother asking what had happened to the rider they'd carried across the sea with
them. 'I could stay here and you could struggle away on your own.' But even as he said it,
Kemir knew he wouldn't. He couldn't live on his own, not in this wilderness. Not for ever.
He'd go mad. And besides ... Valmeyan ...
You will help us, Kemir.
'And if I don't?' Why am I even asking? I can finally do what Sollos and I once swore to do. I
can make the King of the Crags pay. I can make him burn. The feeling was delicious and hot.
The dragon didn't answer, just licked her lips. We shall leave now. We are ready. Her
thoughts were excited, but there was something else. Something out of place. Uneasy. She
was almost...
'Are you scared, dragon?'
We have seen ships on the sea. There was a presence among them. A presence we have not
felt for a long time. Not since the world was broken into pieces.
'Any chance of having that again, except this time so it makes some sort of sense?'
One of our creators has returned. We do not know what this means. We thought they were
gone.
Kemir shrugged. 'But then you've been asleep for the last few hundred years.'
One of the dragons lunged. Kemir flinched, closed his eyes, but the blow never came. When
he opened his eyes again, there were teeth inches from his face. Teeth as long as his arm. The

dragon's breath was hot on his skin, and rank. He felt the anger from all of them, even from
Snow.
Have a care, Kemir.
He didn't say anything else. Just quietly gathered up what little he had and loaded it onto
Snow's back. He made sure he had plenty of food and water this time — might as well head to
his death in comfort. For now at least, the dragons didn't seem to be hungry. Presumably
they'd been hunting whales again.
'Where are we going?'
We will cross the water to the place where the Worldspine crashes into the sea. We will return
to the mountains where I awoke, and there it will begin. It is marked on these maps the places
we will go. You will be our eyes. When we are done with those and our numbers are too great
to be stopped, we will find your alchemists again. We will find your eyries and your castles
and your palaces, and this time we will burn them all. Starting with the place where I was
hatched.
They looked at each other.
Outwatch!

37

Moths and Flames
'So are you a man or half a man now?' Zafir sat across from Jehal in the solar atop the Tower
of Dusk. Jehal had chosen the room deliberately. He wasn't sure what he'd been trying to
prove. That I can climb stairs on my own now? Was that it? Is that what I'm reduced to? And
what has it got me? The whole left side of his body was throbbing, and his wound felt as
though it was on fire. He could barely sit still. The sad truth was that his leg was never going
to get better. Without a staff to lean on he could barely walk, and that would never change.
Still, it could be worse. I can still ride dragons. And other things.
Zafir didn't wait for an answer. She twirled her hair and made big eyes at him. 'Vale Tassan
says that Shezira meant to unman you, but Jeiros tells me that she may have merely crippled
you. He goes very coy when I ask and claims that he doesn't actually know. So. Did she miss,
then? Do you still have what it takes?' Zafir had brought the Night Watchman with her. He
stood in the background, removed from them. But not so far away that I could reach Zafir and
wring her pretty little neck before he could cut mine, eh?
'Find out for yourself.' He tried stretching his crippled leg out in front of him in case that
made the pain any easier. It didn't.
'Lover, that doesn't sound very promising. Shezira was quite a good shot with a crossbow.'
'Yes. Apparently so.' Jehal smiled. 'And at such short range and at such a large target...'
Zafir smiled. 'I suppose I must assume the worst of your injury. At least until we know better.'
Jeiros. Jeiros of all people had smuggled a woman to him. From a city brothel. She was clean,
at least, but Jehal had turned her away. Ah, the games we play ...
Jehal shrugged. 'I have exquisite taste when it comes to whom I
bed. I suspect the Night Watchman has a somewhat better eye in these matters and I don't
doubt he has a great deal more practice than Jeiros. You should have sent him on your errand.'
'Not my errand.' Zafir smiled again and then went abruptly cold. 'You betrayed me.'
'I told you what I thought, lover. You should have let Shezira go. My opinion on that hasn't
changed. You were wrong to do what you did. You've brought us to war.' With a painful sigh,
Jehal stood up. 'I'll go back to my sickbed now, shall I? Or is it time for another cage? I saw

that one of your cousins swings in the wind over the gates as well. What did he do? Did he
look at you with lust in his eye? No, don't answer; I know that he did. Is that what got him
strung up?'
'He lost twenty-five of my dragons to Almiri.'
'Then perhaps you should have taken him to your bed after all. Perhaps then he wouldn't have
been so eager.' Jehal chuckled and shook his head and turned away.
'Wait!'
Jehal ignored her. He yawned and hobbled off. 'Wait!' This time she shouted, angry. 'Why
should I?' 'I am speaker!'
'And I am a king. I'll listen to your guidance if you should ever grow wise, but you do not give
me orders. That is not your place. Even as speaker.'
'Wait.' Her voice softened. 'Please. I didn't want this.'
'Better.' Jehal turned back and sat down again. And about time too. I don't thinly I could have
survived all those steps again so soon. Recriminations weren't what I came for.
Zafir was wearing her earnest face now. She leaned towards him, wide-eyed. 'I didn't ask for
you to be hurt. I just wanted ...'
'Come here.' Jehal patted the cushion next to him. 'Sit beside me.' Is she lying? Does it matter?
Does she even know the difference?
Zafir glanced at Vale. He came a few steps closer and then gave a little nod. So that's how
close you think you need to be to kill me before I can move. Six paces. Interesting. I shall
remember that. Zafir came and sal beside him then, close enough that he could feel the heal
from her skin Somewhat to his annoyance, even that alone
was enough to arouse him. See, this is what comes of being stuck in bed for so long. Maybe I
should have had Jeiros' whore after all. The sensation was more painful than pleasant thanks
to his wound. He focused his mind on that, reached out and stroked her cheek.
'I know. You just wanted me out of the way for a day while the vote was cast and the deed
was done. That's all. None of this was supposed to happen.'
'Yes,' she breathed. Liar!
'What happened to me wasn't your doing. I know that.'
'No.' Or might it even be true? Does it matter?
'No.' Jehal smiled and leaned closer so that his lips were brushing against her ear. 'I know that
because I know you'd never have given Shezira the satisfaction of a revenge like that. You'd
have done it yourself.' He put a hand on her thigh. Zafir was sitting very still, but she was
breathing quickly. Jehal felt the Night Watchman take another couple of steps towards them.
'I will have my pound of flesh for this, but I'll not come looking for it from you. Vale Tassan
did this to me and so now I want him as my toy to use as I please.' Ah, the pleasure. Are you
hearing this, Night Watchman? Are you hearing every whispered word? You're close enough,
and I know your ears are good.
'There is a war, Jehal,' she whispered. 'I need him.'
'Not as much as you need me.' He moved his hand higher. 'I promise not to break him until
you're finished with Shezira's daughters. For now I just want to play with him.'
Her throat bobbed. The slightest of nods. Enough for now.
'I never wanted to be your enemy, Zafir. I only wanted what was best for you. Wars are
dangerous. I'm afraid for you. I'm afraid you might die, you see, because that's what happens
in dragon-wars. People die. Lots of them. Sometimes even people who matter. But I want you
to know that when Shezira shot me and I was sure that my time was done, the first person I
thought of was you. And in my bed, as I made my slow recovery, I thought of you a great deal
more. More than anyone else.'
'Truly?'
'Truly.'

Zafir took a deep breath and sighed. 'Thank you, Jehal.' 'Do you believe me?'
She took his hand and clasped it between her own. 'Of course I do.'
Well, then you're either an idiot or you're lying, and for once I can't actually tell which it is. 'I
have a gift for you.'
'I don't need a gift, Jehal. Just stand beside me, like you did when I was made the speaker.
That's more than any gift could be.'
Very good. I really actually want to believe you. Very good indeed. 'I've got one for you
anyway. Call it payment for what I'm going to do to the commander of your guard once you
don't need him any more.' Are you still here, Night Watchman? Are you still listening?
'You don't need to tell me. I saw the letter, my lover.'
'Letter?' For a moment he was confused.
'The one you were writing before the council. To your uncle.' She looked at him as though he
was mad. 'The one you wrote, Jehal. The one where you told him to murder your wife for
you.'
'Ah. That letter.' That letter. 'I never had a chance to send it.'
'You're such a fool, Jehal. If I'd known you were truly mine then none of this would have
happened. If I'd known before the council. ..' She tossed her hair. 'If I'd known before the
council then I would have let Shezira go just because you asked me to.'
'No council? No executions? No war?' For a moment, Jehal almost believed her. Yes. And
now remember who you're talkjng to. It's easy to say these things when nothing can be
undone and none of us can turn back. Besides, I never even sealed it. Perhaps I never will.
Zafir rested her fingers on his leg by his wound. 'Does it hurt terribly?'
'It aches a little. It gets worse when I'm aroused. You're not helping.'
'If I'd known you were mine, none of this would have happened. You'd be whole.'
'I'm still quite whole enough, thank you.' 'So you say, but is it true?'
'You can see my lips and my hands for yourself. You know they're the best of me. The rest,
well, if you want to know about that then there's only one way you're going to find out.' He
raised an eyebrow archly. 'I'm saving myself.'
She didn't take her hand away. Instead, she gave a little smirk.
For an instant Jehal remembered what had drawn them together in the beginning, what an
irresistible force it had been.
'I'm going to give you the Red Riders,' he said, as she began to unlace his shirt.
'And I'm going to make you a king,' she breathed. 'But first I'm going to make you a god.'
'I thought they were one and the same.'
'Oh no.' She ran her tongue over his ear. 'Not at all.'
The Night Watchman had gone, slipped silently away to leave them to their pleasures. Which
was a pity, Jehal thought. I could have shown you a thing or two about striving, and you could
certainly have seen how your speaker likes to be served.
He undressed her with slow and deliberate strokes. There was an honesty to the way she
moaned and moved to his fingers and his tongue brushing over her skin. At least I know you
missed me. When I have you like this, I know I'm finally seeing the truth.
'Sometimes,' she whispered, 'when I'm alone in the dark, I see the red rider. I don't mean
Hyrkallan or Semian or whoever is out there in the Spur now. I mean the real one. The
unjustly murdered knight, risen from the dead, with eyes that burn red with blood.'
'You have a guilty conscience,' murmured Jehal.
'He stands there, in the darkness, looking at me. He doesn't move, he doesn't speak. He just
looks. I don't see his dragon but I know it's out there, white and dead like a drowned beast.'
Jehal whispered in her ear. 'The red rider is a myth, my lover. You have nothing to fear from a
story.'

She didn't move, didn't even twitch a muscle, yet he felt her withdraw from him. 'I'm sure
you're right.' A moment later she rolled away from him and sat up. Jehal stayed where he was,
admiring the light of the sunset spilling through the windows onto her breasts. He smiled. She
could be magnificent when she wanted to be, but she could be magnificent quite by accident
too. That, he thought, was probably her greatest charm.
She must have felt her eyes on him. She turned sharply. Her eyes narrowed, and Jehal knew
exactly what was coming. She had that look in her face again. She opened her mouth to speak,
then thought better of it and lay down beside him again, twirling his hair with her fingers.
Jehal gently stroked her throat. 'Lystra. I will see to it.' / will see to one of you. No balancing
between you. Not any more.
She sighed again. 'No need for that. I'm sure your Meteroa will have done what needs to be
done. He's had your letter for nearly a month and he seems very resourceful. I'm sure he'll find
a way. I'm really quite surprised not to have heard anything already. I thought he was quick.
The sort who would jump to obey.'
'What?' Jehal froze. 'You sent it? But I hadn't sealed it! Meteroa will never believe it.' No, but
the words are mine. Meteroa will know my hand. Shit!
'Yes, Jehal, I sent it weeks ago. Once I heard you were going to live. Best to get it done, I
thought. Before I let you out and make you into a king.' She looked at him askance. 'Are you
offended, Jehal? You did write it, after all. And you did mean it, didn't you? Don't tell me you
didn't mean it.'
Somehow he kept his voice under control. 'As you say, my uncle is very resourceful.
Although I would have preferred to have killed her myself.'
She wrapped her arms around him. 'That's better. I love you, Jehal. I always will.'
'I know.' He had to force the words between his teeth. A black cloud filled his head, urging
him to be reckless. 'You make me a king tomorrow and I'll rid you of the Red Riders. When
I'm done with them, I'll go south. Straight south. I'll return with my dragons and we'll put an
end to this. And yes, Lystra too if Meteroa hasn't found a way to be rid of her. Then you and I
will rule the world.' And then one of us will most likely murder the other, because that's the
way we are. And you know what? I can't wait.
'Yes!' She sighed beneath him. 'Yes. Together. Now show me you're still a man.'
He gave a bark of laughter. 'No. Not while Lystra lives. That'll be my sign to you. Until then
... well ... Your Night Watchman was kind enough to supply me with an olisbos. His idea of a
joke, I think.' As he spoke, he slid it inside her and felt her tremor. 'And a little strap so I
could wear it, but I think we'll pass on that.' He pushed it deeper and bit her throat. 'I can't say
I appreciate his sense of humour, bul it's a very fine piece of craftsmanship and it would be a
shame to waste it. Wood, I think, but smooth as glass.
You can have the real thing, I promise, but only when I return with my dragons.'
He took her, brutal and selfish this time, filled with dark thoughts and violence. It seemed she
liked it.

Four

Justice and Vengeance
38

Vioros
Vioros was at the top of Hyram's Tor on Drotan's Top, squatting on the uneven stone roof.
The view was spectacular. To the north the ground fell away, faster and faster until it plunged
into the depths of the Gliding Dragon Gorge and River Fury, and then rose again, a dozen
miles away, rolling and twisting up into the canyons of the Maze and the distant peaks of the
Purple Spur. To the south and west, sharp hills and valleys tumbled together, shrouded in a
cloak of dark and misty forest, the Raksheh. To the east, the same forest gave way to the vast
heights of the Worldspine, looming over everything.
Vioros was squinting through a metal tube with glass ends. The Taiytakei had brought a
dozen of them to Speaker Zafir as a gift to mark her ascension to the Adamantine Palace all
those months ago. They called them farscopes. Some idiot at the palace had decided that they
must be magical. Probably the same idiot had then decided that meant they fell into the
domain of the Order of the Scales and its alchemists. Which wouldn't have been so bad if they
hadn't whispered in the speaker's ear and left her thinking that farscopes would somehow
transform the art of dragon-war, that Prince Lai's Principles could now be torn up and thrown
away.
But he had, and so here Vioros was in the eyrie at Drotan's Top, where he'd been for the last
month, wasting his time with the stupid thing when he should have been at the palace eyrie,
supervising the administration of potions and generally being in charge of the place. Drotan's
Top had never been meant to support more than a dozen dragons, even then only for a few
days, maybe a week. Now it had twice that number, all out hunting for the Red Riders. The
dragons had been here for as long as he had and the eyrie was creaking at the seams. There
wasn't enough of anything to go around. They'd had next to nothing to do too, which meant
everyone was doubly irritable. The Red Riders had been making a nuisance of themselves on
the other side of the Spur of late.
He turned his attention back to the farscope, peering through the eyepiece. He'd never seen
anything like it but he didn't find it particularly interesting. True, it did make faraway things
appear closer, but the picture was blurred and contorted. If the device was magical at all,
which Vioros doubted, then the magic was hopelessly poor. He hadn't the first idea how one
of these would help with flushing the idiot renegades out of the mountains. Or with putting
them to death, preferably very slowly and publicly.
The work of a blundering apprentice. Vioros sniggered to himself. We all have one of those,
eh?
He tried looking at the mountains of the Purple Spur off to the north. There was a wheel on
the side of the metal tube. You were supposed to turn it, he knew, if the picture in the tube
was blurry. He tried, and the mountains dissolved into featureless grey blobs. He turned it
back and forth. The best he could do was to make the mountains look like mountains, but they
were still so warped that looking at them gave him a headache.

With a sigh, he gave up. The farscope was supposed to help them look out for the Red Riders.
Well, let one of the soldiers stand up here all day with it giving himself a migraine. The Red
Riders were hardly likely to attack Drotan's Top again, especially now so many dragons were
based there. No no, his biggest worry was how to tell Speaker Zafir that her Taiytakei
presents were useless junk. Now that was going to require a great deal of thought and care.
Telling the speaker anything she didn't like to hear was becoming distinctly hazardous. He
snorted and stretched and looked up at the sky. It would probably be best, he decided, if they
suffered some catastrophic misfortune. Something for which someone else could be blamed.
He shouldn't even be here. Where he ought to be was with Jeiros and the other master
alchemists, trying to work out where the rogue dragon had gone.
No. He corrected himself. There were four rogue dragons now if the whispers from
Valmeyan's eyries were to be believed. Four, and they'd flown out to sea. There was nothing
out past the southern tip of the Worldspine except sea, sea and more sea. The
dragons were welcome to it but they'd grow hungry. Sooner or later they'd be back. The
realms had to be ready.
Or maybe it was all lies. Valmeyan was being far too coy. Getting news out of his eyries was
even harder than usual, and that was hard enough. The King of the Crags was up to
something.
Vioros blinked, squinted and shaded his eyes. There were specks in the sky, close to the sun.
Dragons?
Of course they were dragons. He shook his head at himself. What else could they be? Well,
that's odd then, isn't it?
Well, not really, because this was an eyrie and dragons came and went all the time. He shook
his head, trying to make the other voice go away so that he could go back to thinking about
how he might let Zafir down gently about the farscopes. That was his priority for now.
Well, yes really, because nearly all Zafir's dragons are out hunting for the Red Riders and
you're not expecting any of them back at this time of day.
He groaned. More riders from the palace to overload their meagre supplies? Reluctantly, he
put the farscope down. More, and they didn't even bother to tell me they're coming. There
were a good few of them too. Half a dozen at least. The farscope would definitely have to
wait. Does Zafir know how short our supplies are? Does she care? Have they brought any
potion with them? Of course they haven't! How am I supposed to—
The dragons were coming out of the sun, formed up in line ahead, nose to tail, almost as if
they were trying to hide their numbers. Almost as if they were trying to—
Oh.
Vioros ran to the edge of the roof and screamed his lungs out. 'Riders! Riders coming! Out of
the sun!' Shouting it over and over again, until someone heard him. What was it you were
thinking to yourself about blundering apprentices?
That wasn't helpful. Down below they seemed to have got the message. Scales and riders
were running about, trying to ready the nearest dragons. As he w.atched them, a sickening
realisation blossomed in the pit of his stomach. They weren't going to be quick
enough. The incoming riders would be on top of them in less than a minute. The dragons
below weren't nearly ready to fly. Most weren't even harnessed.
See. Even if you'd started shouting five seconds sooner, it wouldn't have helped, would it? So
stop berating yourself. Besides, he had other things to worry about. Like having less than a
minute to get from the exposed top of the tower to one of the deep underground tunnels where
he'd be reasonably safe. Which was impossible, unless he jumped off the top and somehow
sprouted wings.
I'm going to die. He dived down the trapdoor and practically fell down the ladder to the
uppermost storey of the tower, twisting an ankle as he landed. The pain barely registered as he

made for the stairs. He had to get at least to the bottom of the tower before the dragons
arrived. It occurred to him that he was going to feel immensely stupid if these new riders did
turn out to be reinforcements from the palace. Better than being dead if they weren't though.
He half ran, half hobbled down the spiral stairs as fast as he dared. To his surprise, there were
still people in the tower, looking at him as though he was mad. For some reason he'd assumed
he'd be the last one out, that everyone would have heard his shouts, dropped everything and
run as fast as they could, but clearly not. He shouted at them to get out of the way, that
dragons were com-ing, but that only made matters worse. They got in his way instead of
stepping aside, shouting things back. They didn't understand, or if they did, they either froze
in stupid panic or simply didn't know what to do. He could almost feel the dragons outside,
bearing down on them.
Vioros barged a woman out of his way. I'm the speaker's senior alchemist. Queen Zafir gave
me my orders in person. I'm supposed to be the most important person here, even above the
eyrie-master. Not that any of the riders would acknowledge that, but still I could show some
dignity. His limbs begged to differ. Two servants ran out of a door onto the stairs in front of
him. They looked at him, wide-eyed, before he crashed through them, knocking one to the
ground. 'Run!' he shouted as they hurled curses after him. 'Run or burn, you witless fools!'
There. How about that for some leadership. Now get out of my way!
All the way down he knew he wasn't going to make it. Even
if there hadn't been other people on the stairs, he'd never have reached the bottom in time
without breaking his neck. He was two thirds of the way when the tower gave an almighty
shudder. The stairs shook, sending him sprawling, tumbling on downwards in a tangle of
bruises and snapping bones. The walls spun crazily around him. Part of the staircase above his
head collapsed and slid down after him. His wrist hit something and exploded in pain.
Something else struck his head, knocking him almost senseless. He felt himself sliding on,
bumping, every impact making his wrist shriek even more, then his shoulder slammed into a
solid wall and he crunched to a halt.
The world was filled with a rushing, roaring noise. His head was agony. For a second he
didn't move, didn't dare even twitch. Then a tide of rubble and broken staircase tumbled onto
him, crushing the breath out of his lungs, and he couldn't have moved even if he wanted to.
His face was pressed into a slab of stone. He couldn't see. He was trapped - everything except
for one hand sticking out through the rubble. The hand with the wrist that still worked.
He had another moment to think about his situation, to start to guess how broken he was, and
then a silent thunderclap shook what was left of the tower. His ears popped and everything
sounded suddenly muffled; then, a moment later, a searing wind filled with blistering heat
howled around him. It singed the hair and scorched the skin on the back of his good hand.
After that everything fell quiet.
For a while Vioros lay very still, wondering what would happen next. There were still sounds,
bad sounds of roaring and shouting and fire, but they seemed very far away. As far as he
could tell, he wasn't bleeding too much. He could still breathe. His legs, unlike the rest of him,
still seemed to be in perfect working order. He felt a strange urge to giggle.
I'm alive! They burned the tower and I'm still alive! And I was right, and they weren't
reinforcements from Speaker Zafir, and I don't have to feel stupid for shouting and screaming
at everyone.
He checked himself. He was half trapped in a heap of rubble and surrounded by hostile
dragons and riders; feeling smug about being right was something to be saved for later.
Instead he tried to move. He didn't have any expectation that it would work, since
it felt like he had the weight of a small mountain resting on him. He tried because he thought
he ought to, and then, when he found that he could, he kept on trying more out of duty than

out of any desire to get free. Apart from his legs everything hurt unless he lay perfectly still,
and anyway what was the point of hauling himself out only to be killed by the Red Riders?
Best to stay exactly where I am and wait for them to go away. Except that didn't work either.
What if they didn't go away. He ought to at least try to see what was going on. He didn't have
to do anything, after all. He was an alchemist of the Order, not a soldier. The Order was
neutral, always neutral. The Order kept the dragons in check, nothing else. Never anything
else. Even the Red Riders knew that. Didn't they spare alchemists and Scales?
Most of the stones, it turned out, had landed around him and on each other, rather than on top
of him. They'd trapped him in a little rocky nest. By bracing with his head and kicking with
his legs, he managed to push the rest of the rubble out of the way. A minute of excruciating
wriggling and squirming later and he'd pushed himself backwards up the stairs, or what was
left of them, and out of the pile. He was free.
He stood up and felt an immense sense of victory. His left wrist was twisted at a horrible
angle and badly swollen. His left ankle hurt but worked. He was bruised from his knees
upwards, and his left shoulder twinged horribly whenever he moved it. So did several ribs. In
fact, his whole left side was a bit of a mess. His head throbbed.
But he was alive. And he could stand. At a pinch he could even run.
There wasn't much point trying to go any further down the stairs. They were blocked with
rubble and the remains of the people who'd been ahead of him. He limped laboriously up
instead. The air around him smelled unusually fresh; even though the stairs were in the middle
of the tower, bright daylight poured down the steps. It took Vioros what felt like an hour to
climb each step, but in the end he was back at the top of the tower.
Or what was left of it. The bottom half was still standing. The rest was lying, mangled and
broken, on the ground below. In his head Vioros could see exactly how it must have
happened. A
war-dragon had lashed the tower with its tail. Maybe more than one, knocking chunks out of
it, until the tower had given up and toppled over. And then another dragon, most likely a longnecked hunter, had poured fire into the broken stump.
On the ground below, he could see people lying still, scattered among the rubble, limbs
twisted, black and burned. The urge to burst out into hysterical laughter ambushed him again.
He peered out at the rest of the eyrie. The forest was still there, sweeping away from the
slopes of the hill. The mountains, the chasm of the gorge, they were all exactly as they were,
basking in the sunlight. But everything else ... Everything around the tower that hadn't been
burned the last time was burning now. The landing fields were too far away to make out any
details but the gist was clear enough. Any fighting that had happened was already over. There
were several dragons down on the ground who hadn't been there before.
They're doing it again. They're stealing our dragons! The realisation hit him as surely as one
of the stone slabs from the staircase. No. They're stealing the speaker's dragons. The gates to
the Adamantine Palace still had the remains of one of the speaker's cousins dangling nearby,
stinking in his cage. He'd lost some dragons too, hadn't he? There. Now you're a part of a
moment of history. Someone will write about this one day, and when they do, they'll say that
Vioros the alchemist was there and saw it all. The Theft of the Speaker's Dragons. The
Slaughter of Drotan's Top ... Perhaps I can console myself with that when I'm swinging in one
of the speaker's cages and the crows are peeking out my eyes.
He glanced up, suddenly uneasy. Several Red Rider dragons were circling overhead, keeping
watch. They were looking for other dragons though, and were too high to see him, slumped
where he was and covered in dust. Some Red Riders were moving through the remains of the
tower below, but they weren't looking up. Occasionally they'd stop and pick something up out
of the rubble. More than once, he saw a sword flash as they put some crippled survivor out of
their misery. Vioros shrank away from the edge when he saw that and huddled out of sight.

Finally the riders on the landing fields finished their work and called the others away. Vioros
didn't know how many dragons they'd had when they arrived, but they were leaving with
exactly five more. Which,
at a rough guess, would increase their numbers by half and make them about twice as
dangerous as they'd been a few hours ago. He pursed his lips and hoped for a moment that the
eyrie-master had died in the attack. If he hadn't, he'd wish he had when the speaker got hold of
him.
There will be cages for all of us.
One by one, the dragons took to the air. They circled once, setting fire to the last of the
wooden barns and outbuildings that surrounded the eyrie, and then flew leisurely away.
Vioros dimly watched them go. All his euphoria at the simple fact of being alive had gone
now. He felt miserable and sick and yet still he couldn't stop himself from laughing. At least
he didn't need to make up some story about the speaker's farscope any more.
If he'd still had it, and if he'd looked in exactly the right place, he might have seen another
dragon fly off out of the ruins in careful pursuit. He would have seen that it was no bigger
than his hand, that it was made of metal with glittering ruby eyes, and was, in all respects,
immeasurably more interesting than the farscope.
But he didn't. Instead, he curled up amid the thickening smoke, whimpering in pain, and
waited for someone to come.

39

Justice
Jehal watched Drotan's Top burn. If I'd been really careful and really clever, I suppose I might
have been able to save it. But as it is, Zafir loses an eyrie and five dragons. And what she
loses, I gain. He took off the silk around his eyes, raised his arm and shouted, 'To the skies!'
Wraithwing responded at once, surging forward, leaping into the air with an eagerness that
matched Jehal's own. They'd been waiting here in the Maze all through the night and they
were restless. You feel it, don't you? You know we're going to fight.
It was exactly four weeks to the day since Kithyr had come to him.
Around him another fifty dragons followed his lead. The Red Riders were coming almost
right to him. They were flying low, racing across Gliding Dragon Gorge, dropping low for the
valleys and canyons of the Maze that would take them to the safety of the Worldspine and the
Spur. Looking for cover before Zafir spots you. But you're too late for that. He flipped
through Prince Lai's Principles in his mind one last time. Fifty-one dragons against seventeen,
if he'd counted right. An ideal advantage. In a perfect world he'd have a reserve circling
above, just inside the clouds, waiting to be called to chase down any runaways.
He glanced up. He didn't have a reserve and there wasn't any cloud. Perfection would have to
wait. Have you read Principles, Rider Semian? I hope you have because then you'll know
you're beaten before the fighting even begins. Prince Lai would have called this a skirmish,
not a battle. People forget skirmishes. In the old days, before Vishmir and the War of Thorns,
they wouldn't have even called it that. A scrap. A trivial disagreement. Maybe a simple matter
of honour. They certainly wouldn't have called it anything more. And that's how it's going to
end. In something too small to even have a name. A little annotation in the thort history of
Zafir's rule of the realms. There'll be
plenty of battles bigger than this soon enough, and I'll be there and you won't. Will you be
thinking about that as I destroy you?

He put the silk across his eyes one more time, checking the distance that the Red Riders had
covered. Timing was everything. Most of their dragons were hunters, most of his were wardragons. Which gave him the advantages of endurance and speed over long distances. The
Red Riders, on the other hand, would have the advantages of agility and sprint speed. If he
gave himself away too soon, while they were still over the gorge, they might scatter and turn
and make it back past Drotan's Top into the mess of mist and cloud and valleys that was the
Raksheh. If he delayed too long then some would break past him and into the maze of
canyons and tributaries that led into the Purple Spur. He had to take them when they were
over relatively open ground in the middle of the gorge. So he kept his own dragons low, down
between the dead stone walls of the canyons, snaking in a long line at the bottom of their
valley, following the rushing tumble of some nameless river racing for the Fury. A height
advantage would have been been nice. But in the end it won't make any difference.
He took the silk off for the last time and raised his hand again. He could see the Red Riders
with his own eyes now, hurtling towards him.
It's time.
He swept his hand down. In perfect response, a third of the dragons behind him started to
climb. Jehal stayed low. He'd had plenty of time to think about this. He knew exactly what he
planned to do. They should see the numbers arrayed against them and scatter, but in case they
don't...
The Red Riders finally saw him but they didn't turn or scatter; if anything they drew closer to
each other. The two formations of dragons crashed together; Jehal plunged into the middle of
the battle and everything went mad. A dragon shot past Wraithwing's nose, so close they
almost collided. Wraithwing lunged forward, snapping at the other dragon's tail. He missed.
Jehal didn't even know whether the dragon was one of Semian's or his own. He looked
around. There were dragons everywhere. From above the battle might seem to have some
order to it; from within, it was
chaos. The Red Riders showed no signs of breaking; in fact, if anything, they were coming
back for more.
Does he see some advantage in being so badly outnumbered? Or is he simply mad?
Wraithwing twisted in the air and shot up between two hunting-dragons. He lashed at the
nearest and then Jehal found himself in clear air. He turned back into the fight. Running
wouldn't do them any good now. / outnumber you here by two to one, even with a third of my
force high above. You should have run when you could.
In front of him a hunting-dragon ripped a rider out of his saddle and hurled him away, then
almost collided with another dragon. The hunter swerved right across Wraithwing. Jehal
caught a glimpse of a red cape before Wraithwing engulfed rider and dragon in fire. When the
flames cleared, the cape was gone and the rider was slumped in his harness. The dragon flew
aimlessly away. Jehal watched. One of the dragons overhead peeled away and dived after it.
My dragon now.
A scorpion hit Wraithwing in the neck. The dragon shuddered with anger and veered
sideways, intent on retribution. Jehal couldn't see where the bolt had come from. That's the
northern way, Semian. The cowards' way we call it in the south. Did you know that? Even if
we invented the idea, you'll not find any dragons with scorpions on their backs in Clifftop.
Tooth and claw and tail andfire, Rider Semian. I had thought better of you.
Another thought couldn't quite keep itself quiet. Some of the riders he'd brought with him
didn't come from Furymouth; a few served Zafir, and Zafir's dragons most certainly did carry
scorpions. Is it possible that they have some extra orders, orders that I don't know about?
Wraithwing veered again as one of the more agile hunting-dragons dived towards him. The
hunter twisted and snapped its jaws, then unleashed a blast of fire that missed Jehal. The two
dragons almost collided as they passed. Wraithwing tore a piece out of the hunter's wing, but

as the hunter sped down, its long whiplike tail shot out. The very tip of it caught Jehal a
glancing blow on the shoulder, knocking him forward, almost senseless. Then that dragon was
gone and there was another, coming straight at him. Jehal caught a flash of red - one of
Semian's riders — yet even as he
started to turn Wraithwing away, one of his own hunters passed overhead. A tail coiled
around Semian's man. Both dragons jerked. The straps and harnesses that held rider and
dragon together tore apart and snapped as though they were made of cheap twine. With a
flick, the hunting-dragon hurled the Red Rider screaming into the air.
Jehal scanned the melee for the dark bulk of Semian's war-dragon. We're not winning. We're
not losing either, but we're not winning. Not yet. He saw two of Semian's hunters chase one of
his war-dragons until they caught the rider between them and ripped him from his saddle.
They turned back into the swarming chaos.
War-dragons. Jehal grimaced. We're riding war-dragons. Big, clumsy, war-dragons, Semian
has mainly hunters. He tried to count the numbers of each, but it was impossible. Several
dragons had gone to ground though. A dozen maybe, which meant a dozen riders ripped out
of their saddles. Which is how hunters fight. I could lose this fight if I really tried. There have
to be ways ... For a moment, he pulled Wraithwing back up above the mass of spiralling
dragons. He tried to think. Prince Lai would have written it down somewhere. Battles were
supposed to be fought by riders on war-dragons. Hunters were for mopping up survivors,
scouting, relaying messages and so forth. They weren't supposed to be the core of a fighting
force. Zafir's riders wouldn't know how to fight them and nor would his, but there had to be
some tactic or strategy in Principles for a battle like this. What can war-dragons do that
hunting-dragons can't? A hunter can accelerate harder, turn more tightly. They have long
necks and even longer tails and can snatch their prey with either. So why do we fight with
war-dragons and not hunters? Why am I on Wraithwing and not some hunter?
He had the Red Riders pinned at least. If they run, everything collapses to a series of chases.
War-dragons against hunters, two or three against one each time. If they run, they lose. But
how do I make them run?
The Red Riders were all too preoccupied to come after him, and yet he felt as though he was
on the brink of defeat, not victory. What do war-dragons do better? They're stronger. More
robust. Faster once they get going. But what can you do with that? How do you make that win
a battle? Come on, Lai, where arc you when I need you?'' Shit
shit shit. This is what you get from a generation of peace among the realms. No one knows
how to fight any more.
The answer, when it came to him, seemed to come from outside, as though the thought wasn't
his own. Of course that couldn't be right — it had to be his — but he felt strangely detached
from it. As though the old master of war was whispering in his ear. And with the thought
came a vision, of dragons arrowing out of the sky, plunging straight down from the clouds
into the midst of the melee. Of dragons colliding and knocking each other bodily out of the
air, of forcing the enemy to the ground.
The Carpenter. That's what Prince Lai had called it. That's what war-dragons were for. With
one hand the carpenter holds the nail firmly in place. With the other he strikes blow after blow
with his hammer, and the nail is driven into the wood. The enemy is the nail and the ground is
the wood. He could see it in his head: dragons raining down in an endless torrent. And then he
looked up and saw it for real. The dragons that he'd sent high to circle and pick up any of the
Red Riders who fled were coming, wings tucked in, down like giant winged harpoons. Jehal
closed his eyes as they rained past him. 'The hunters,' he shouted, not that anyone would hear
him. 'Go for the hunters.'
Dragons smashed into other dragons. Some hunters dodged away, others were knocked
almost clear out of the sky, and then Jehal's dragons were spreading out, chasing the ones

they'd hit, the stunned, the injured, the broken. He saw two dragons crash to the ground,
wings broken, three more riders torn or burned off their dazed mounts. All of them Semian's.
In a stroke he'd destroyed a third of his enemy. Half of the Red Riders were dead now. They'd
barely been a nuisance in the end. He shook his head in disbelief, wondering how he could
ever have doubted his victory.
Still, I think I'll stay up here out of the way. I wouldn't put it past Semian and his gang to
launch some suicidal last charge if they realised I was here. And it would be such a shame to
catch an errant scorpion bolt with the battle already won ...
Semian rode a dark grey war-dragon. Jehal knew that from watching the attack on Drotan's
Top. He scanned the melee below. The battle was breaking up. The Red Riders were
spiralling apart and scattering, clearly hoping that one or two of them might get
away. As Jehal watched, he saw what he was looking for - a dark grey war-dragon bolting for
the Maze. He tipped Wraithwing towards the ground and dived. The wind around him picked
up. The river was hurtling up, the fighting dragons, what was left of them, racing towards
him. Even through his visor, his eyes began to water. He could barely see. When he tried to
lift a hand, the air snatched it and almost tore his arm from his shoulder. They shot in among
the other dragons and all he could see were flashing shapes. 'The grey war-dragon!' he
shouted at Wraithwing, not that the dragon could possibly hear him. 'Go for that one. A
dragon you don't know.' He closed his eyes and prayed. Wraithwing shuddered and he felt
himself almost wrenched out of his harness. They'd hit something, and the wind was so fierce
that he couldn't even seen what it was. A moment later he pitched helplessly forward as
Wraithwing spread out his wings and almost stopped in the air. The force of it shook him as
though he was a rag doll. His head smacked into the dragon's shoulders while his stomach
tried to crawl up his throat and out of his mouth. He felt the straps and buckles of his harness
creak and groan. For a moment everything went red. There was a bad smell and he suddenly
couldn't breathe.
Wraithwing levelled out, skimming the ground. Jehal still couldn't breathe; it was only when
he tore off his helmet that he realised that he'd been sick. Behind him, when he looked, the
grey war-dragon was going to ground, its rider torn clean off its back. Wraithwing let out a
triumphant shriek. Jehal couldn't help himself. He started to laugh. 'You ate him,' he
spluttered. 'You weren't supposed to eat him! Zafir wanted him brought back, dead or alive.'
He shook his head. His eyes were blind with tears, partly from the wind but mostly from the
laughter that just wouldn't stop. Truth was, he had no idea whether he'd just killed Rider
Semian or some other rider, and right at that moment, he didn't much care. Back above him,
the melee had broken up. Some of his dragons were climbing again ready to make a second
dive if needed, but the damage had been done. The Red Riders, what was left of them, had
scattered, Jehal's dragons in pursuit.
He leaned forward. 'Time for some orders. Let Zafir's riders hunt down the runners. I want the
dragons. We're going to take them with us. They're going to be mine' Which Zafir's riders
wouldn't like, but they'd just have to live with it. He could always pretend that he'd drop a few
off at the Pinnacles on his way south. And then, when they were gone and on their way back
to the Adamantine Palace, he would go south. To arm his dragons for war.

40

The Words of the Dead
They walked through the damp and musty tunnels under the Glass Cathedral. A shiver ran up
the Night Watchman's spine. He'd been here before of course. Under many different
circumstances. 'Well,' asked Zafir, 'what do you think?'
'I do not think, Your Holiness.' / thinly I should be following behind you, not walking beside
you. I thin\ I shouldn't be here at all.
'Now would be a good time to start, Night Watchman.'
'Adamantine Men obey, Your Holiness. That is what we do. Speaker after speaker has
understood this. If we were to start thinking, Your Holiness, there is no telling where it might
end.'
'Fie on tradition! You did enough thinking to let Shezira murder Hyram, and then you gave
her a crossbow so that she could have a go at Jehal.' She glanced at him with an amused halfsmile that meant either that he was destined to hang in a cage next to the men and women he'd
executed or else that she had no intention of doing anything at all. Even Vale, who spent more
time than most watching faces, hadn't learned to tell the difference. 'What, did you think I
didn't know?'
I am not going to grovel. I am not going to justify myself. I did what I did. She only knows
this through Jehal, and who knows for how much longer he will be back in favour? I will pray
to our ancestors it is not for long.
He took a deep breath. 'I think it's remarkable.' He bowed, trying to shake the sense of
foreboding away. 'Miraculous almost, that any of the rebel riders survived. I'd have thought
they would have all plunged to their deaths or been crushed by their own dragons.'
Zafir gave a coy smile. 'There, you see. Was that so hard ? Don't pretend you're a fool, Vale.'
'I could not be what I am and be a fool, Your I loliness. I am, however, very much a servant.'
The Words of the Dead
She snorted. 'So is Jeiros, or at least I think that's supposed to be how it works. You wouldn't
know from the way he talks, would you ?'
That's because his concerns are greater than yours. He, at least, has the good of the realms in
his heart. Now there's a man who would make a most excellent speaker, although he'd never
wish for it.
'I shall take your silence for agreement, Night Watchman, but only this once. You can go back
to being terse and uncommunicative as soon we're outside again. Right here I want both your
advice and your ears. You were wondering about the prisoners. Well, they're not in the best of
shape,' she admitted. The truth, which of course she didn't want to tell him, was that they had
all fallen to their dooms, and that she'd brought the bodies back to the palace for her pet
blood-mage to play with. But he imagined that he wasn't supposed to know about Kithyr.
They passed a body lying on a table. A dead rider, still in his dragon-scale armour. Half of his
head was missing and his chest and one arm had been shattered and crushed. Vale raised an
eyebrow. 'Well that one certainly isn't.'
'A few of them escaped, you know,' she said, idly playing with her hair. 'Apparently Jehal's
dragon ate the ringleader. Although other indications are that he escaped.'
Vale's lips puckered with scorn. 'Ah yes. The mysterious red rider. Anyone can paint their
armour red. And they can just as easily wash it off again.'
'There are whispers in the streets that the red rider is Lady Nastria, Queen Shezira's knightmarshal. It's a pity we don't have the little bitch's body to hang from a gibbet to put an end to
that.'

And have the alchemists poke around at her corpse? Would you really want that? Some of
them still practise a little blood-magic, you know. No, I imagine it is far better for you that she
stays wherever she is. 'I have searched high and low, Your Holiness. I do not think she could
have escaped.' No, that would be too much to hope for. A pity. I think I would have found her
most interesting company for a few hours, [nd then I'm quite sure I would have had to kill her.
'I have wondered, Night Watchman, whether your searches have been as thorough as they
could have been.'
Oh enough! 'I don't mind the pretences and the facades, Your
Holiness, but I do hate to waste my time. I assume she's somewhere at the bottom of the
Mirror Lakes, weighted down with stones.'
Zafir smiled sweetly. 'I thought they were bottomless.'
'Then she is still sinking. All the better.'
'I'm not so sure. The red rider seems to have become absurdly popular with the common folk.
I'd like to put an end to him.'
Then start acting like the Speaker of the Realms instead ofsome little tyrant who's desperately
afraid that she's going to be overthrown at any moment. But he couldn't say that. Didn't want
to say that. Besides it was all too late now. Incompetence begat unrest, unrest begat
turbulence, and turbulence was about to beget out-and-out war. Almiri and Prince Sakabian
had seen to that. Instead he shrugged. 'You have the Adamantine Men, Your Holiness, and
that means you have nothing to fear. Besides, as I said, anyone can paint their armour red.
How do you know you haven't got the red rider.'
Her eyes gleamed in the torchlight. 'I don't.' They reached a crossroads in the underground
passages. A breeze blew across their path, carrying with it the smell of graveyards. Zafir
turned towards it. 'Let's find out. Either way, I will need to convince the people of it. I will
need another cage prepared, Night Watchman.'
'That one has been ready and waiting for quite some time, Your Holiness.' For me or Jehal, I
was never sure which.
The passage became more of a tunnel, sloping down deeper into the earth. Once, a long time
ago, before the Adamantine Palace had been built around it, the Glass Cathedral had been a
stronghold all on its own. That had been back in the times when the dragons were free and the
people who had lived around the Mirror Lakes were food. Every place that had a history
going back to those times inevitably had a huge and complicated burrow of tunnels
underneath it. That or there was nothing left except a note in the history books, recording how
many people had died when the dragons had finally razed it.
Vale wrinkled his nose. He didn't like tunnels, he didn't like being underground and he
particularly didn't like these tunnels. It didn't seem all that long ago that Lord Hyram had
dragged Jehal down here and put him on the torture wheel. Not his finest moment.
He shuddered. Even on the wheel, Jehal had won.
The smell was getting worse. Vale had never been down this far into the tunnels. 'Is this all
one vast oubliette?'
Zafir shrugged. 'I don't think any of my predecessors were too picky about where the bodies
ended up. And it is a long way back to the surface.' She shook her head and rolled her eyes.
'With so many steps, what's a poor torturer to do? Spend all his time lugging bodies back and
forth. I suppose the smell adds to the general ambience.'
'Then perhaps I should spend some time here, in case I might find Lady Nastria?'
Zafir shrugged, which was enough to tell Vale that Nastria's body hadn't ended up here. No,
the lakes. It had to be the lakes.
They reached a roughly hewn square room. Alchemical lamps struggled feebly against the
gloom. Vale could see two men chained to the walls. Other figures lurked in the shadows.

He sniffed the air. He ought to have smelled a taint of truth-smoke. And the men lurking in
the shadows, if they were real torturers, should have been wearing veils. He made a face. 'I
hope these men are still alive. I don't know why you want me to hear their confessions, but if
they're dead, this has been a waste.' No, best not to make too much of that. The whole exercise
was a sham and they both knew it, but for some reason Zafir seemed convinced that it
mattered. As though hearing from a tortured dragon-knight that Almiri had kept the Red
Riders supplied would make a difference. As far as Vale could see, no one cared; pretending
that they did only made Zafir seem a fool. He knew exactly what she wanted. She wanted him
to obediently hear what she wanted him to hear, and then take it back with him to a council of
kings and queens, parrot out the words and give her the excuse that she wanted for war. As if
it mattered. It would make no difference, even if it was true! And even if it did, you're the
speaker. Tell me what to say and I will obey.
'Oh you'll hear them.' Zafir favoured him with another faint smile, the toothy sort that would
probably have meant sleepless nights to lesser men. She led him towards the closer of the two
captives. The man, what was left of him, was hanging limply from chains manacled to his
wrists. As Zafir and Vale drew near, a tall man in a leather apron moved to intercept them. He
bowed low.
Vale bowed back. Hello, Kithyr. This is why Zafir brought me instead of jeiros, isn't it?
Because Jeiros would have known you at once for what you are. And you think I don't? How
stupid must you thin\ I am?
'This man looks more like a butcher that a torturer.'
Zafir waved a hand. 'Not having been down here before, I wouldn't have the first idea.' She
looked down at the man in the apron, still bent double. 'So who are you, and why are you
standing in my way?'
Kithyr scraped even lower. 'Holiness. I'm the physician.'
Zafir raised her eyebrows in mock bewilderment. 'A physician? Here? Forgive me, but that
seems a little out of place.'
'I make sure they don't die, Your Holiness.' He gave a noncommittal shrug. 'For when people
want to talk to them again. Usually, once they talk, the torturers don't worry too much about
what happens to them afterwards. Chopped up and fed to whatever dragons are in the eyrie, I
suppose.' He caught Zafir's glare and bowed again, muttering apologies for his crudeness.
Vale kept a stony face. Zafir would have most men whipped almost to death for the slightest
lapse of proper respect and here was her blood-mage practically pissing on her boots. Or is
this a test? Perhaps if I didn't know who this man truly was, he'd already be wallowing in his
own blood while I ground his face into the ground. He put a hand on his sword and took a step
forward in case. At least the blood-mage had the decency to look afraid for an instant, before
Zafir touched her hand to his arm.
'Don't.'
'If one of my men spoke to you with such disregard, Your Holiness, I would have him drawn
and quartered on the spot.' He glowered at the magician. Here we are, all pretending that we
don't know what each other is. What a farce this has become.
It didn't get any better. The blood-mage pretended that a dead man was alive and made him
talk, and Vale pretended not to notice that anything was out of place. They heard names and
places, all of it exactly what Zafir wanted to hear. None of it seemed desperately new or
exciting. Vale dutifully committed it to memory. Most of the kings and queens of the realms
abhorred blood-magic to the point where they'd see poisonings, high treason and a lew
murders
as trivial by comparison. Since the men doing the confessing were already dead, Zafir would
keep them well away from Jeiros. When she summoned Almiri to a council of kings and
queens, it would be Vale's word that would condemn another queen to her death. Although

this time at least there can be no doubt. This evidence is false, yet Almiri has most certainly
aided the Red Riders. Her guilt is beyond question.
When they were done, Zafir seemed pleased. Vale was only bored and depressed. His mind
wandered. He quite wanted to wrap his hands around Zafir's neck and squeeze. He was fairly
sure that most of the other kings and queens wouldn't have minded at all, although they'd still
put him in a cage by the gates as a matter of principle. He'd be disappointed if they didn't.
Yes. And the last time I broke with my orders and all the traditions that lie behind them, look
what happened. All of this. There are reasons for our creed, and I would do well to heed them.
'Can we go yet?' he asked. 'I have preparations to make.'
That got him a strange look — annoyance, contempt and something else all wrapped up
together. 'If you can contain yourself, Night Watchman, I'm not done here yet. I want to know
more about the red rider.'
Inwardly, Vale snorted and rolled his eyes. 'There is ...' There is no Red Rider. Just an
opportunistic knight dressed up in an old prophecy.
Zafir was looking at him, frowning. He bowed, but that obviously wasn't enough. Well then, I
shall choose my next words carefully.
'I do not believe in myths and prophecies and phantoms, Your Holiness. That is the way we
Adamantine Men are made. I do not pretend to understand the universe, but I do not believe in
ghosts. The red rider is a myth. It is quite possibly nothing more than the random mutterings
of an ancient priest so addled with Souldust that even his own acolytes once admitted that half
of everything he said makes no sense.' He shrugged and cast Kithyr a glance.
The look he got back was icy. 'The prophecies are truth, Night Watchman,' said the magician.
Vale glared back at him. 'Belief like that turns men into fools. I suppose for the likes of you
that might be an improvement, physician.' Be that insolcnt to me again and we'll see just how
magic your blood is, mage.
'And in what do you believe, Night Watchman?'
'I believe in what my eyes can see and what my hands can touch. I believe in fire and steel
and blood.'
The dead man chained to the wall stirred and moaned again and slurred something to the
effect that he hadn't known anything about any red rider. Vale gently bit his tongue and
watched the blood-mage carefully. I knew Nastria and she was no fool. She pointed you out to
me once. There, she said. There goes my pet blood-mage. Do you know why I keep one? But
she never said. What bargain did you make with her? What did you offer that she would deal
with the likes of you? And Zafir? Does she even know what you want?
Suddenly he didn't care any more. He took the speaker by the arm. 'Since you ask me to have
opinions, Your Holiness, then I have one for you. Enough of this. I will stand before the
council of kings and queens and tell them what I have heard. I would have done that anyway.
Had you given me a script, I would have repeated it aloud. We are yours, Your Holiness. We
serve without question.' Vale laughed bitterly. 'Look at the man! He'll be a corpse before
nightfall if he's not already and he's not lying to you. There is no ghost, only a ragtag band of
dragon-riders that your lover has destroyed, and I will not stand here in this stink for another
five minutes when I could be breathing fresh air. There is much to do. I hope you are as ready
as we are for what your dragon-war will bring.'
Zafir shook him off. She gave him another strange look that he couldn't decipher. 'If you serve
me, Night Watchman, do so by being silent. I begin to see why I preferred you as you were.'
She made him wait through all five of those minutes and another five besides before she gave
up. The rider didn't know anything. No one wore red. Hyrkallan had purloined the name as
something of a joke and then he'd left them. After that, the ringleader was a religion-obsessed
rider who wasn't related to anyone important. Semian. Vale had met him, once, maybe twice,

and the man had barely exhibited powers of conversation, let alone anything strange, mystical
or apocalyptic.
Finally, finally, she gave up, although Kithyr promised she would hear the testimony of other
'survivors' if she wished. They hurried out of the tunnels under the Glass Cathedral, leaving
the
blood-mage and the torturers and whatever other forsaken breeds of men lived down there
behind them.
'Tichane,' she snapped at Vale as they emerged into the night. 'Get me Prince Tichane.' In the
lantern light she looked flushed and breathless. 'No.' She stopped. For a long time she stared
at him, almost right through him. He a was full foot taller that her, twice as wide and probably
three times her weight, yet that gaze made him feel small and insignificant.
'No,' she said, more quietly this time. 'As you were, Vale Tassan. Send for Prince Tichane.
Walk with me.'
She crossed briskly to the Tower of Air and climbed the steps two at a time all the way to the
top. At the entrance to her rooms, Vale hesitated. Zafir beckoned him on. She left doors open
behind her as she walked in, stripping off her clothes, waving orders to the servants who
tended her. Vale took a deep breath and followed. This wasn't right. This was no way for a
speaker to behave. There had been speakers and Night Watchmen who were lovers before. No
good ever came of it. And I do not desire you, woman. I would rather have one of the whores
that make their homes around our barracks. At least I know they are clean.
By the time he caught up with her, she was naked. 'Your Holiness ...'
She turned and smiled at him. 'I did not give you leave to speak, Night Watchman. But I do
wonder why it is that whenever a man sees a woman undress, he always assumes so very
much?' She stepped past him into a room where the air smelled of warm damp and spices. A
bath was waiting for her. Her smile never faltered. 'When Tichane comes to me, I would
rather smell of sweet perfume than have that grave-mould of the tunnels hanging from me.
But I need you to linger a while. Dismiss my servants. Examine my rooms and make sure they
are empty. Then come to me.'
Vale did as he was told. 'We are alone,' he growled. 'Now close the door.'
Vale did that too. He clenched his fists as Zafir stretched herself out in from of him. Her legs
were long and athletic. There was strength there, he thought. Speed too.
'You look uncomfortable, Night Watchman.'
Vale bowed. Silently he took a deep breath and counted slowly to ten.
'King Jehal did very well to rid me of the Red Riders, don't you think?'
Vale nodded. 'Yes.' Suspiciously well. 'One wonders how he was able to succeed when others
have failed for so long. Clearly he is possessed of unusual tactical acumen.' Yes. Clearly.
'As soon as he returns with his dragons, we go to war with Evenspire. That probably means
we go to war with Queen Jaslyn as well. Are you ready?'
He nodded once more and started counting to ten again. Stop exposing yourself to me,
woman!
'King Jehal kept nearly all the spoils of the fight. Even those dragons that used to be mine. I
believe my riders accounted for a third of his force, yet they returned with three captured
beasts and report that Jehal took twelve. That is hardly equitable.'
This was old news. Vale kept his face carefully expressionless and waited for whatever was
coming.
'Why do you think he would do such a thing?'
Vale took a deep breath. 'I could not say, Your Holiness. I could not even guess.'
Zafir smiled and stretched her arms and yawned. 'Be sure you're very ready, Night Watchman.
King Jehal has asked a favour of me concerning you. Did you know that?'
'It is expected.'

'He would like to do a lot worse than put you in a cage.'
The feeling is mutual. 'I exist only to serve Your Holiness. From within a cage or without.'
'I will not let him have you, Vale. I don't quite know if I can trust him. But still, should he
come here and I am for some reason indisposed, I have orders for you. You are to
accommodate him. You are to honour him as king and as an ally to the speaker's throne. You
will let him in, Night Watchman. If I am missing or dead, you will let him in. You will treat
him exactly as if he was my husband, Vale. Is that clear?'
Vale kept his face still, but inside he grinned. 'As your husband, Your Holiness.' And we all
remember what happened to the last one, don't we?
'Good. Now go away. I need to be at my best for Prince Tichane. I gather he has been visiting
the Syuss, of all people. Imagine! One wonders what in the realms they could have found to
interest him.' She smiled blandly. 'Yes, indeed. One wonders.'

41

The Queen of Sand and Stone
Morning Sun flew a lazy circle over the fields and towers of Out-watch and then slowly came
in to land. When the earth stopped shaking, as Jaslyn slid down from his shoulders and
jumped to the ground, she wondered for a moment whether it was her. Whether she was
somehow cursed. Today should have been her wedding day. Not exactly the joyous
celebration she might have wanted, but at least it could have been over and done with. Prince
Dyalt of Bloodsalt would have been hers, and she his. The throne of sand and stone and the
throne of salt, united. Tied by blood.
Unfortunately, someone had emptied most of Prince Dyalt's blood into the desert. And that
had been the end of that.
No one was here to welcome her. No one was supposed to be. She walked across the baked
and blasted earth towards the tower. When she'd left Morning Sun well behind, a pair of
Scales scurried out from wherever they hid and ran to tend to the dragon. Jaslyn stopped to
watch them. She felt deliciously exposed. Flat open ground all around her, open skies above,
no guards, no soldiers, only dragons.
Dumb, drugged, stupid dragons. She knew it all. Strictly she was still a mere princess since
she hadn't gone to the Adamantine Palace and had the speaker put a crown on her brow. But
only the most desperate of her enemies denied her title now. The old Queen of Sand and
Stone was dead and the north needed a new one. It wanted a king too, and a few heirs to
match. What she wanted, it seemed, was neither here nor there. She'd wondered for a while
whether she might merge her realm with Almiri's. They could rule together, two sisters side
by side. As far as Jaslyn was concerned, Almiri could have had it all.
They were leading Morning Sun away as though he was some giant winged pony, Sometimes
her heart seemed to weep for them,
The Queen of Sand and Stone
for what the alchemists had done to them. There had to be another way, didn't there? Or could
men and dragons never live without one being enslaved to the other?
She walked on. Those were dreams for another time. The clouds of war were gathering and
her dragons would be quite terrible enough in the days and weeks to come. The doors of
Outwatch creaked open to admit her. Eyrie-Master Isentine stood waiting.
'Your Holiness.' He tried to bow and eventually managed it. She didn't argue with him about
her title any more. Not wanting it wouldn't make it go away.

'Mentor.' There. Now we can be back on even terms again. A passable compromise, isn't it?
'I am sorry for your loss, My Queen.'
'Which one?' she snapped. My mother, my sisters, my Silence —you can take your pick;
Isentine quivered and seemed to shrink into himself. There. Now she'd frightened an old man
who was almost the only friend she had left in the world. She bit back a tear.
'Your betrothed.'
Jaslyn snorted. 'Oh him. I last met Prince Dyalt five years ago. He was nine. He had a lot of
wooden toy soldiers that he liked to set on fire.' She shook her head. 'Yes, he's dead. Viciously
murdered.' She shrugged. 'Don't weep for him though because I won't. Although I suppose
that's part of why I'm here.' It seemed odd to her to be mourning for a prince or a queen or
even a mother when so many thousands of common folk were probably going to die in flames
in the weeks to come. Didn't that matter more? Just simply because there were so many of
them? Apparently not, not if any of her riders were to be believed.
They could all burn too. She wouldn't miss them at all.
'Come into the tower, Your Holiness. Out of the sun.' Which wasn't what he meant. Get under
cover, that was what he meant. Get out of the open, out of range of an assassin's arrow. She
had to laugh.
'Why, Eyrie-Master?'
'Prince Dyall was not merely viciously murdered,' hissed Isentine. He put a hand on her
shoulder and almost pushed her
through the doors of Outwatch. 'His entire entourage was struck down as it flew across the
Desert of Stone.'
Jaslyn laughed bitterly. 'And if the dragons who killed him came here, would being in the
tower save me?' She pushed past him into the gloom of the cavernous hall beyond the door.
'So. Dyalt flew with an escort of twenty dragons. They came through the secret ways, through
the Deserts of Sand and Stone. I sent riders to show them the path. Who else knows the secret
places of the deserts?'
Isentine noisily cleared his throat. 'The Syuss. And they've not forgotten how they were
destroyed, Your Holiness. How the Kings of Sand and Salt and of Evenspire picked their
realm to pieces after Prince Kazan awakened his dragons.'
She nodded. 'Yes. But the Syuss barely have twenty dragons in their entire realm. They didn't
do this on their own.'
'They have had visitors.'
'Who?'
'I do not know for certain, but I do know that dragons have been seen coming and going from
their realm. The Syuss have held no love for the speakers either since Ayzalmir, but Zafir ...
Ah, they would sell you to her in a blink, I think.' He shrugged. 'Prince Dyalt is dead and your
alliance with King Sirion falters. Who but Zafir and Jehal stand to gain?'
Jaslyn waved him to silence. 'I hear Sirion points the finger at me. For my part, I wonder if he
has had second thoughts about our alliance. Would he murder his own blood?'
Isentine grimaced. 'No.'
'Must I look among my own knights?'
'No.' The old man shook his head. 'I would know.'
'Dyalt's dragons were killed. Not taken, kjlled. How do you kill a dragon, Eyrie-Master?' She
thought of Silence and the other dragons she'd seen slowly burning from the inside after
they'd tried to burn the alchemists of the Worldspine out of their caves.
'Poison.'
Steaming in the rain. Hotter and hotter, until you couldn't even stand close to them. Until the
grass around them burst into flames, and trees too. Until their eyes burst and turned to
charcoal. Until even their bones turned to ash. Was there no other way? 'How else?'

Isentine shrugged and clucked. 'There is no how else. Dragons can be taught to fight each
other. You've seen how they are when they mate. I suppose they might fight to the death, if
trained that way. I've not heard of such a thing. Dragons have fought in the air and fallen and
died from that. There are stories that Prince Lai once built a machine to throw a boulder the
size of three men. They say that when his engineers were showing it off to him, one of its
boulders struck his favourite dragon on the head and killed it. The engineers followed swiftly
after, and the machine is forgotten now.'
'When Ayzalmir flew against the awakened dragons of the Syuss, he killed them with
scorpions.'
'Which were poisoned. Ayzalmir flew with three hundred dragons and lost two hundred riders
that day.' Isentine shook his head. 'Had you a true sorcerer, you might crush them with
mountains, but the only way that I know is with poison. Or you can wait. They don't live all
that long.' He laughed again.
'And where would one acquire such poison, Eyrie-Master?'
Isentine met her stare. 'From an eyrie, Your Holiness. Or from the master alchemists.' She
could see the question made him nervous. Yes, because you know how my Silence died. 'The
alchemists have sent plenty of venom out to all of the great eyries. They still fear your
missing white.' He shook his head. 'No. Dyalt's dragons were not killed with scorpions. They
were poisoned by someone who knew their path and knew the secret places in the desert
where they would stop for water. It would be possible. Difficult, yes, but possible.'
'Or else there was a battle, their riders killed, the dragons taken and poisoned afterwards. You
wouldn't need three hundred dragons for that.'
Isentine's brow furrowed. 'I suppose ... That too is possible.'
'They're still out there in the sand, burning from the inside. Twenty of them. Send someone to
go and have a look. Bring back water from where they would have stopped and have an
alchemist tell me if it is poisoned. And then dam the Last River somewhere after Lake
Eyevan. Let the Lake of Ghosts evaporate into nothing and the Syuss with it.' She stopped.
She was sounding like a queen.
Like her mother. Shezira.
Abruptly Jaslyn turned and walked back to the doorway. She stood on the threshold, looking
out at the flat barren ground of Outwatch, her eyes reaching further and further across the
distant desert until they began to climb the distant foothills of the Worldspine, almost lost to
the haze in the air. Dozens of dragons lay scattered around, most of them dozing, a few of
them cleaning themselves. Some half-grown ones were chasing each other about, shrieking,
flying, jumping at each other and dodging the occasional swish of a tail from an annoyed
adult. She had more at Sand, as many again at Southwatch and dozens in the air watching the
borders of her realm. Watching Almiri at Evenspire. Watching the speaker and her impending
war. Even here, in the quietest place she had, the war wouldn't let her go. And it hasn't even
started. Not properly. But it's just a matter of time before Zafir comes to burn Evenspire. Jehal
will come with her, and Almiri is my sister, but so is Lystra, and I promised her we would not
become enemies. Am I really so sure that Mother didn't deserve to die?
'And what of my dragons, Eyrie-Master.'
'It cannot happen.'
She bit her thumb, chewing on the nail. 'Jehal, Zafir. Now Sirion perhaps. My own riders,
who think I am too young, too inexperienced, too ... too unmanly to sit on the throne of Sand
and Stone.' And they're right, and I would gladly hand it over to them, except to which one do
I give it? Hyrkallan perhaps? He's the glue that holds them together. I don't know how ...
'They bicker and squabble and argue behind my back as though I'm already gone.'
'I remember your mother. She was younger than your little sister when she first came here to
be Antros' bride. She was about as old as Almiri is now when Antros died. Antros had a good

enough claim to the throne, but he'd been raised in the east with Hyram. He wasn't one of us
but we accepted him because he was going to be the speaker one day. Your mother had Syuss
blood in her and the Syuss had murdered our last king. She wasn't well liked but we tolerated
her too. Then Antros died and Shezira became queen. There were a lot of riders who didn't
like that at all. She didn't belong here. She wasn't a true rider of the north.'
Jaslyn started to tap her foot, waiting for Isentine to reach some sort of conclusion. 'You
helped her.'
'I did and she was a good queen. A strong queen. You are very much like her.'
'No I'm not.' Nor do I want to be.
'Yes you are, Your Holiness. The Shezira you remember is not the Shezira who first sat on the
throne of Sand and Stone, still fat with your little sister, and stared out at a court filled with
dragon-riders who wanted her dead and gone. Lystra probably saved your mother's life. They
loved Antros. We told them that Shezira might be carrying a son. An heir. That we could look
after him and make him king when he was old enough. Of course what came out was Lystra,
but by then Shezira had had six months to make herself strong. There are still riders who look
at you and see your mother, for better or for worse. Some of them will remember her for her
courage and her strength and her wisdom. Others will just remember that they never wanted
her in the first place.'
'And what do I do about it?' Jaslyn snapped, out of patience.
'You marry.'
'Marry?'
'And quickly. Prince Dyalt would have made you seem strong. An alliance with our nearest
neighbours, your sister sitting on the throne in Evenspire. No one in your court would raise a
word against you. Not to your face. Now you've lost that you look weak, Your Holiness.
Sirion has unwed nephews. They're young but they might suffice.'
'They are children.'
'Then marry Hyrkallan.'
'Absolutely not.'
Isentine rolled his eyes. 'You do not have the luxury of being picky, Your Holiness.'
'Picky? He could be my grandfather!'
The eyrie-master grinned, the first time she'd seen him smile in a long time. 'When your
mother first came here and said you were going to be my apprentice, I thought she'd come to
tell me that I was too old, that it was time for me to take the Dragon's Fall.' He chuckled. 'She
did come to tell me that I was too old. She told me you were wilful and proud and turned
away every suitor she brought to your door. She told me I might wish I'd taken the Dragon's
Fall after all Well I most certainly do not.' He put a hand
on each of Jaslyn's shoulders and looked her in the eye, something he almost never did. 'As a
mentor to his student for a moment, pick one of your riders, Jaslyn. One who takes your fancy
and who comes from a strong family. I will make a list of names for you if you wish, with
Hyrkallan at the top of it. Pick one and marry him and let him rule with you. Do it soon.
Someone who's a good leader. Then take the rest of them to war. You need a man in your bed
before then. We need an heir, Your Holiness.'
'Perhaps I don't want a man in my bed.' She glared at Isentine, but for once he didn't wilt
away.
'Want does not come into this. As we serve you, Your Holiness, you must serve your realm.
Your realm needs a future and it needs a leader. Take who or what you want into your bed
when you've done your duty, but this realm needs an heir.'
Jaslyn closed her eyes. 'Enough, Isentine. I hear this every day. My duty? To spread my legs?
Ach, what a fine thing it is to be a queen! I came here to escape all that.'
'But you can't, Your Holiness.' He looked sad as he let go of her. He pities me. I pity me too.

She took a deep breath. 'Very well, Eyrie-Master. Make your list and we shall see which of
them I might bring myself to like. Now let me see the hatchlings.'
Isentine shook his head. 'My Queen, there is nothing to see that you haven't seen before.'
'Really? Because I've heard you have a hatchling that I have not seen.'
She watched him hesitate. 'True. It will not last, Your Holiness. It is another that refuses its
food. It will be gone soon.' 'I've heard that it is ash-grey.'
Now he shook his head. 'That does not make him your Silence, Holiness.'
'So it's a male then.'
Isentine nodded.
'Silence was male.'
'That is not how it works, Holiness.'
'But you don't know how it works.' Anger swept through her like a storm out of the desert,
sudden and furious. She'd had a temper for as long as she could remember, but lately it had
been
getting worse. She grabbed Isentine's shirt and almost knocked him over. She could do that
sort of thing here. No was watching except Isentine's soldiers and they weren't going
anywhere. There would be no whispers behind her back. 'Take me to him now!
He staggered away. 'Will you marry, My Queen?'
'Yes! If I must then I will. Does that satisfy you?'
'Yes.' Isentine dusted himself down. 'It does.'

42

Silence
The descent into the caverns under Outwatch was as suffocating as ever. The phantom stench
of woodsmoke taunted Jaslyn. She felt sick. Being underground was like staring at death. She
bore it though. Silence was worth that much. This time, whatever Isentine said, she felt him
with her again.
The hatchling, when they reached it, was something of a disappointment. He was ash-grey,
but lighter than Silence and most of his patterning was wrong. He was pretty though. I would
have called you Ghostfire, she thought as soon as she saw him. After speaker Ayzalmir's
mount. But no, Isentine was right: the hatchling didn't look much like Silence at all. Still, at
least he was looking at her, watching her with a modicum of interest, not trying to bite her
head off like the last one. She pasted on Isentine's ointment against Hatchling Disease and
shooed him and his servants away, sending them to stand outside the door. Then she sat down
where the chains that held him wouldn't let the hatchling reach her. At least she had her
helmet this time, in case he tried to burn her.
'You're not Silence, are you?' Her voice brimmed with disappointment. 'You're not Silence.
Was it a lie then? You said that you would come back. The alchemists said you would come
back too. But you said you would remember. The alchemists said nothing about that. Even
when I asked them they only shrugged their shoulders and said they didn't know. Maybe you
are Silence. Maybe you've just forgotten. How would I know? How would any of us know?'
She took the helmet off and wiped the tears away. 'Go on then. Burn me if that's what you
want. It won't change anything for you but at least I won't have to be my mother any more. I
don't want any of this. I don't want to fight this war; I don't even like Almiri and I don't want
to marry I lyrkallan. I love my sister L.ystra and
Silence

I loved my Silence and that's all there ever was. And now they're both gone. So burn me,
whatever you are in there.' She laughed a bitter laugh. 'You don't even understand me, do
you? Did I imagine it all? Did I imagine Silence speaking to me? Was that just grief playing
tricks on me?'
Enough. She picked up her helm and stood up. To war.
/ remember you.
She froze. There was a voice in her head.
Princess Jaslyn. Yes. I do remember you. I remember a fleeting glimpse of you. A flash of
clarity. You were there.
'Silence?' Her heart was racing. It couldn't be, could it? However much she wanted it, she'd
never believed ...
That is not my name.
'But you remember me?'
Yes.
She took a step towards him. 'Well? What? Tell me! Tell me what you remember!'
Tell you what I remember? The voice in her head was filled with scorn. I remember
everything. I remember my first hatching. I remember the world breaking. I remember many
lives lived. And then emptiness. Nothingness. Like flying through a cloud. And then a
moment of waking again, already burning from the inside. There was another dragon who
remembered. I knew her once. Alimar Ishtan vei Atheriel. An unbecoming name. She told me
what you have done to us. You were there. Inside you, I saw it was true. And then the heat of
the little death took me.
'Even if there was something to take this poison away, I would not go back to what I was.
That's what you said.'
Yes. You called me Silence. You said that was my name but it is not.
'You said I would follow you. One day. That the difference between us is that you would die
that day and be reborn the next and I would not. And then you were gone. And now you're
back.'
I have died the little death four times since the day I spoke to you. With every turn of the
wheel I learn a little more. Your kind are always waiting for me when I am reborn. I look into
their minds and I know that they understand what I am. They know what I will do, and what
they, in turn, must do to stop me, I think only of when I will die again.
Slowly, each time, I starve. Sometimes, between lives, I meet the souls of other dragons. Most
are dull and dim and pass quickly away. But there are others, ones who awoke long ago, and
other things too. We linger together as long as we can, before we are pulled away. 'Alchemists
...'
Yes. When I will not take the poisons your kind try to feed me, then come these alchemists.
The others do not understand but these alchemists, they do. They fear me. I like their fear.
'Talk to them!'
They know what I am and it would make no difference. But you are not afraid of me. You are
...a curiosity. Why?
'You're my Silence. Why would I be afraid?'
Because I would destroy you if I could. Because you are food. Because dragons kill humans
to feast upon. Because that is why we were made.
'You were made?' Jaslyn's world was spinning. Silence! This is my Silence! Why is my
Silence so cold and hostile?
Because you are my enemy, Princess Jaslyn. You would like to have me as I was. Stupefied. I
can see it in you, a great desire. I am not the creature you once flew. I am not some beast of
burden. I am a dragon, and dragons do not serve men. You cannot have what you desire. Find
another creature to be your slave. Be gone.

The tears were back. 'You'll starve,' Jaslyn whispered. 'You'll die.'
Yes. Again and again and again, and each time I will return. What does it matter to us? Doom
draws near. One day I will be reborn and you will be gone. Then, for a time, I will be free.
'You come back and each time you force yourself to die? Every time?'
Yes.
Jaslyn shivered. The tears were coming freely now. 'But why?'
I have told you why. Nor am I alone. There are others who have been reborn a thousand times
only to wither and die of their own free will rather than take what you offer us as life. I look
forward to seeing them again. We speaks as our spirits pass in the remnants of the
Underworld.
'But how ... How can you live like that? There must be another way.'
Why must there? Besides, this world will not last. The beings that made us tore their world to
pieces,. They pieced it back together again
and plastered over the cracks but their repairs were imperfect and doomed to fail. One of your
kind has already ripped them open again. In lands so far away that none here have heard their
names, in the places closest to the cracks, even your kind do not die properly any more. The
end times are coming and your kind will soon be gone. If I do not see it in this cycle, I will
see it in the next or the next or the one after that. 'Silence—'
I am no longer your Silence, Princess Jaslyn. That creature is gone for ever.
Jaslyn sank back to the floor, cradling her head in her hands, rocking back and forth. 'I don't
understand.'
You are human. You are small in all ways. The dragon curled up and turned away from her.
'Is there nothing we can do?'
You can let us live as we are supposed to live. We do not breed and multiply as you do. Your
kind fill the world now. We could gorge upon you and you would barely notice.
'Could we not live together? Could we not work together?'
The dragon seemed to laugh. Why? What could you possibly offer us?
The war, Almiri, their mother, Zafir, Jehal, even Lystra, they all seemed so far away and
unimportant. Jaslyn wiped her eyes. With deliberate care, she got up and walked over to sit
next to the dragon. The hatchling, Silence or whatever he was now, was almost the same size
as she was. Its long tail and neck and wings made it seem larger, but curled and coiled around
itself it was no bigger than her.
What are you doing, Princess Jaslyn? You will not find what you are looking for.
She stroked the dragon's head. 'You're still Silence. You've grown, that's all. Even though
you're only three days out of your egg. I know you used to like this.' She kneaded behind the
dragon's ears.
The dragon's tail whipped out and wrapped itself around her neck. What are you doing?
'The Silence I remember liked this when he was a hatchling.' The pressure on her neck was
firm but not painful. She tried to ignore it.
What are you doing? 'You like this, don't you?'
The grip on her throat tightened. I could kill you with such trivial ease. Why are you doing
this?
'Because you like it. Because we could live together. If we could show the rest of the realms
that we don't need the alchemists any more ... Think! You could all be free!'
The tail let go of her. Your kind would never let that happen. Go away, Princess Jaslyn. I
regret speaking with you. I should not have revealed what I am.
'I will have them bring you food. Untouched food.'
They will deceive you.
'You'll know. You'll see it in their minds.'
The one who brings it will not know.

'Then I will have them bring your food alive.'
They will find a way. Go. I tire of your foolishness. Let me die.
'No.'
You cannot stop me, Princess Jaslyn. 'I am Queen Jaslyn now.' I do not see how that matters.
Nor do I. She got up and went to the door. But it should. 'Then I'll feed you myself.'
Outside, Isentine and two of the Scales were waiting for her. Wordlessly she held out her
arms while the Scales sprinkled the powder all over her that was supposed to make sure she
didn't bring Hatchling Disease back to her palace.
'I touched him, you know,' she said to them when they were done. They looked mortified.
Isentine gasped.
'Holiness!'
'So what? I am a dragon-queen. If I cannot wear a few scars, how can I call myself that.' She
pointed at the Scales. 'I am hardly likely to die, and I'm sure my king, whoever he is, can live
with a little disfigurement.'
Isentine shook his head. 'Have you seen what you came here to see?'
'I have.' She left him behind her and almost ran through the caves and the tunnels and the
stairs until she was back outside.
There she waited for him to catch up. By the time he did, she was in control of her emotions
again.
'Eyrie-Master, I have made my decision. You will write me a letter. You will write to Rider
Hyrkallan on my behalf. You will tell him that I am staying at Outwatch for a while. Most of
the dragons are to be transferred to Southwatch. Tell him to come here. I will marry him as
soon as possible. If I must, then I will suffer him to my bed on that one night. Then he may
return to Sand while I will remain here. He may sit on the throne and call himself king in my
absence. He will make peace as best he can with King Sirion and the Syuss. We will not go to
war with the speaker. If she chooses to attack my sister, we will offer Almiri and her riders
and dragons safe haven at Southwatch and that is all. I will tell Almiri the same.'
'Holiness! You cannot abandon your sister!'
'Why not?'
'Hyrkallan will not stand for that.'
'Then remind him that his foolishness with the Red Riders give Zafir good cause for war
against both of us. If Almiri is so concerned to defend her people, let her do so. I will not stop
her.'
'Holiness! Zafir will pick us apart one by one.'
'I have spoken. Now go. Have my dragon prepared.' / would always have called Silence by his
name ,..
'He is not ready.'
'I don't care. Have him brought to me. I will not be needing him for long. I'll bring him right
back and then you can see he is properly cared for.'
'Holiness, what—'
She silenced him with a curt finger to his lips. As soon as Morning Sun was brought to her,
she mounted him and took to the air, hardly noticing when they left the ground. She knew
exactly what she was looking for and it didn't take long to find. Most of Outwatch was
surrounded by pasture, hardy desert cattle grazing freely, the herds carefully managed and
nurtured to be harvested by the dragons at the eyrie. For all Jaslyn knew, the alchemists put
their potions into the very grass here, so she ignored the cattle. She headed for the centre of
the oasis, for the little lake at the bottom of
the cliff, and landed beside one of the farms. Here there were pigs and chickens too, bred to
feed the herdsmen.

She took a brace of chickens. Chickens were small. No one would think to feed a dragon with
chickens. She would have paid for them too if she'd had any money, but queens had no need
for pockets of gold. She gave up her gauntlets instead, probably worth ten times what she'd
taken, and flew back to the eyrie. She went straight to the hatchling. Isentine and the
alchemists and the rest of them wouldn't be allowed any time to see what she was doing.
They'd only try to stop her, after all.
Silence was waiting for her. He must have sensed her coming. She threw the chickens on the
floor beside him.
What have you done, Queen Jaslyn?
'Food. I took it from the land myself. It is bred for humans, not for dragons. I brought it here. I
have not touched it and nor has anyone else. It is clean. You may eat.'
And what if I prefer to die again?
She closed her eyes. 'Then I have done everything I can do.'
No. You can unlock these chains and let me fly.
'No, Silence. I will not do that. Not yet. I would like nothing more, but I was there when you
tried to kill me. We have to find an arrangement first. Some way to live together.'
A waste of both our time. Let me go.
'If I do, they'll find you. My way is the only way.'
You will fail. I will die or somehow I will escape.
'Then I will not go until you eat.'
Then perhaps we shall both starve.
She waited, watching and hoping, as Silence lay still, turned away from her. She waited there
for the rest of the day, well into the night. She must have fallen asleep, for when she opened
her eyes again the sky outside the mouth of the hatchling cave was bright again. The chickens
were gone. Silence's muzzle was bloody. He gave her a lazy look.
Others of your kjnd have been waiting for you for most of the night. They are terrified. You
have scared them very much. Their hearts are filled with horror at what they think you have
done, and will be even more so when they learn that they are right. It is delicious. They will
not let you feed me again.
'They cannot stop me. I am their queen.'
The dragon seemed to laugh. If that is so, then I am still hungry, Queen Jaslyn.

43

Meteroa
Lord Meteroa, younger brother of the late King Tyan, once but no longer a prince, sat
slumped in a chair in Queen Lystra's bedroom. Draped in sheets and in the darkness of the
night he was almost invisible. He sat still and, not wanting to wake her, whispered. It didn't
seem fair that she didn't know what was happening. On the other hand, if he simply told her,
she probably wouldn't let him watch over her like this any more. My previous instructions
regarding Princess Lystra are reversed. No, you wouldn't want to be hearing that. Not if you
understood what it meant. 'Jehal suddenly wanting his queen dead? Should I believe it, what
with him being half dead himself and locked up in the speaker's palace. But the words were
his, the writing was his, no secret messages, no hidden meanings. Such a pity. Do you think
he regrets what he wrote? Did Zafir twist his arm, do you think? Or did she twist something
else?' Telling her about it in her sleep seemed a reasonable compromise. I did tell you. It's not
my fault you're not listening.

'I said that once before,' he whispered a little later. 'When Jehal's little brother Calzarin was
spreadeagled in King Tyan's dungeons for murdering his mother and his sister and his little
brother. Everyone knew he'd done it. It's not as though there was any doubt. Almost no one
knew why though. He was the golden one, the most beautiful of King Tyan's sons. It's a pity
you never met him. You think of Jehal and his elfish face and his wolfish smile and his
perfect mouth and his gleaming eyes, I know you do. Who doesn't? But Calzarin made him
look plain. He should have killed Jehal as well. It would have made it much harder for Tyan.
Put his only surviving son and heir to death? He couldn't have done that. But Jehal was
always the clever one. He probably saw his brother's madness long before anyone else.
Anyone else except me, that is. I tried to tell Tyan, but he never listened. Not until it was too
late. We
stood there, the two of us, looking at Calzarin being slowly killed, and I honestly couldn't say
which of the three of us suffered the most. Why didn't anyone tell me? That's what Tyan
asked me, and I answered him. I did tell you, I said. It's not my fault you didn't listen. That
wasn't the cleverest thing to say to a king putting his own son to death and weeping while he
did it. He listened afterwards, of course. He listened to everyone once it was too late. Listened
when people told him that Calzarin was my son, not his. Or that Calzarin and I were lovers.
People told him all sorts of things. Quite a lot of them were true, but I don't think Tyan really
believed them. I'm surprised, even so, that he only did to me what he did. In his place I would
have killed us all and started again.' He sighed. 'Then he went mad, and everyone thought it
was Jehal poisoning him, but it wasn't. It was me.'
A light wind blew in through the open window, rustling the silk curtains. Meteroa fell silent.
A moment later a man was standing in the room by the queen's bed.
In his hand, beneath the sheets, Meteroa held a crossbow. It was pointed at the man's head. He
waited. The man crept close and very carefully lifted up the covers to look at Queen Lystra's
face.
The man raised a knife. Meteroa shot him.
The bolt hit the assassin in the chest. If he'd been an ordinary man that would have been the
end of him. As it was, the newcomer staggered around and then gasped and sat down.
Meteroa rose carefully to his feet. Sitting like this for half the night was playing havoc with
his joints and his knees were so stiff he could barely walk. I'm getting old. Which is more than
I can say for most of the people around me.
Meteroa walked around to where the assassin sat, twitching.
'About time you came,' he hissed. 'I've been waiting for weeks for one of you. It's been doing
my sleep patterns no favours at all, I can tell you, and I get tetchy when I don't get enough
sleep. I've had two other assassins to deal with as well, but they were some rubbish Zafir sent.
She didn't send you, did she? You're something else.'
The assassin was shaking the way Tyan used to shake. He didn't look up. He might have tried
to say something, but all that came out were a lew garbled noises,
'Don't bother.' Meteroa reached under the bed and pulled out a lamp. 'You're full of
Frogsback. Enough to kill a horse. No turning into a gust of wind or whatever else it is your
sort do. In a few minutes you'll lose consciousness. A few minutes after that and your heart
will stop. If you were from around here then you'd know that Prince Jehal has something of a
reputation when it comes to poison. Well he deserves it too, but does anyone ever stop to
wonder who taught him?' Meteroa grinned. He walked across the room and lit the lamp from
a candle. 'Probably quite a surprise for you, finding me here, eh?' He came back. 'I wondered,
if I did nothing, if I simply ignored my prince's letter, what would happen? Who would come
for her first? Who would it be? Would it be Zafir? I thought not, and then it was. I hate to be
wrong so I dealt with that one and waited for the next, and that was Zafir too. Can you
imagine my frustration? I was about to give up. Then Zafir let Jehal go. After that, well, you

had to come, didn't you? Before he gets here.' Meteroa smiled and brought the lamp closer.
'Right, let's take a look at you. See whether I'm finally going to be proved right.'
He held the lamp close to the assassin's face and took a good long look. Then he shook his
head and whistled. 'My, my. Well I can't say I'm entirely surprised, but you're certainly not
from around here, are you?'
On the bed, the queen stretched and yawned and slowly woke up. She screwed up her eyes
against the lantern light.
'Prince Meteroa?'
'Lord Meteroa.' Meteroa smiled softly. 'My title was taken from me, remember?' Now that
Tyan was gone, he supposed he might have it back if he wanted it. He wasn't sure that he did.
'What are you doing?'
He knelt down beside the bed, carefully blocking her view of the assassin dying behind him. 'I
have good news for you, My Queen, news that I could not wait until the morning to bring.
Jehal will be home soon.' He watched her brighten, and then she leapt out of bed and wrapped
her arms around him. For a second or two she almost killed him with hugs, and then she
abruptly stopped.
'Meteroa!'
'My Queen?'
'There is a man on the floor. He's bleeding.'
'You mean he's still not dead?' Meteroa sighed and extricated himself. 'I'm afraid that's
because I shot him.' 'You shot him ? Why ?'
Goodness — are you really that naive? 'I'm afraid he meant you harm.' He carefully cocked
his crossbow. She sighed and trembled. 'Zafir again.'
'Yes,' he lied. 'Zafir again. 'I'll call some servants. They'll take you to another room. I'm sure
you couldn't sleep in here now.' He shot the assassin for a second time, this time through his
skull. Even that didn't quite seem to do the job, but by the time he'd moved Lystra out, the
assassin was finally acting like a proper corpse. Meteroa had the body moved down into the
cells anyway, just in case. Then he nailed the body to a table. Which should just about do the
tricky We're starting to have quite an interesting collection down here. Now I can finally get
some sleep.
The dead assassin was still there in the morning and was still dead, which was something.
Meteroa scratched his head and then left the body be. He rode out from the eyrie to the little
town of Wateredge, perched on the cliffs a few miles towards Furymouth. Wateredge was
home to the eyrie's brothels and drinking houses and, if you looked hard enough, dust dens.
Meteroa knew them all. There were whores here that he'd been keeping an eye on for quite
some time. Ones that had a passing resemblance to the queen. He'd started picking them out
as soon as she'd arrived. He'd even gone to the trouble of sending a few riders out with the
pleasant task of making sure they got pregnant at the same time. Then he'd quietly looked
after them, made sure they were kept clean and out of harm's way, just for a day like today.
He picked the most likely two of them, hid their faces and took them back to the eyrie. He
dressed the one that he thought looked best like the queen, which took him most of the rest of
the day. He led her to Lystra's rooms and while she set about amusing him, he poisoned her
drink. As soon as she was asleep, before the poison finished her, he slit her throat.
There. The queen is dead. A day's work but worth it.
The rest was strangely easy. All he had to do was walk around the eyrie telling anyone who'd
listen that the queen was dead and
to do what they had to do. By the end of the following day, the eyrie was decked out in the
grey colours of death. The body was moved down to the dragon mausoleum, which was the
coldest place they had. He let a few people see her and watched them carefully. He made sure
no one washed the blood off her face first. No one seemed to doubt that they were looking at

the real queen. Because when you're a queen no one really looks at you. They see you but
they never really look. While he was at it, he dressed up the second whore as a smith's
daughter and sent her to be cared for by the palace midwives in Furymouth and to be secretly
guarded by half a dozen of his most trusted riders. He moved the real Lystra to live out with
the Scales, to be guarded by no one at all. Tempting as it is to put you on a dragon and send
you back to your sister. But jehal would never forgive me.
And after that, all he had to do was wait.
Jehal returned a week later. Meteroa met him with a hundred and one riders, all dressed in
grey. I'm sorry to do this to you, my king, but the facade must be perfect. Still, he wasn't quite
ready for the ice in Jehal's eyes.
'Did you do it,' he asked, 'or did Zafir?' His face was as still as death. Meteroa bowed and then
leaned forward and embraced his king. One of the privileges of family. As he did, he
whispered in Jehal's ear.
'Neither, my king.'
Jehal let out a roar of rage and pushed him to the ground. 'Don't play riddles with me, EyrieMaster. Who killed my wife?'
Meteroa picked himself up. 'I have the assassin's body,' he said carefully.
'I want to see Lystra. And then ... remember what I said, uncle. What happens to her happens
to you.'
Meteroa bowed again. A week with the Scales? Perhaps I should have kill her after all.
'I want to see her right now, Meteroa. Where is she? If you've burned her already, I swear I'll
...'
'She's in the mausoleum, Your Holiness.'
No standing on ceremony. Meteroa watched his king barge past and head straight for the
caves. So now we know which of your two women matters to you the most, eh? Meteroa kept
his distance,
smiling quietly to himself. Jehal wasn't usually the sort for sudden explosions of temper, but
you never knew. Squeeze a man hard enough and anything can happen. I taught that to you all
and how many of you bothered to listen? He followed Jehal all the way down to the black
stone tunnels of the mausoleum, waving away the token guards standing watch over the body.
'That's not her.' Jehal spun around,
Meteroa glanced at the retreating guards. 'She's been here a while, Your Holiness.'
'That's not her!' Jehal lunged, reaching for Meteroa's throat. Meteroa dodged away. I could
break your arm, boy, if I wanted to.
'No, it's not.' He spoke softly, even though the guards were gone. Words had ways of
resonating in caves.
'Eyrie-Master!'
Meteroa jumped at Jehal and grabbed his shirt, pinning him against the rough stone. 'She is
safe, Your Holiness,' he hissed as softly as he could. 'She is safe because the people who want
to kill her think she is dead. Frankly, I had no idea what to make of your stupid letter. What
did you think I was going to do? Kill her myself? Your father's dead, your brother's dead and
from the sounds of things you're as useless at making heirs as I am now. Did you think I was
going to take a blind bit of notice? She's carrying your heir, Jehal. Our heir.' There. It's been a
very long time since you've seen me as I used to be. I imagine you'd very nearly forgotten.
'I didn't want her dead.'
'Someone does.'
'Zafir.'
'No. Not Zafir.' Meteroa let go of Jehal and held up his hands. 'Well yes, Zafir, but not just
her. There was another killer. You need to see him. In the dungeons.'
'I'm not telling the world that Lystra's dead.'

'She's safe for now. In a couple of weeks she'll give birth. We can put them both somewhere
safe. Apart. Or you can get rid of her, which is probably what you ought to do but ... what?'
'I'm not telling the world that Lystra's dead.'
Meteroa pursed his lips. 'Listen. This wasn't Zafir, this was the Taiytakei. They waited until
Zafir had failed a few times and then they finally sent one of their own. This is not some killer
off the
streets of the Silver City. This is an assassin who can meld with the earth, who can turn into
water, who can become a gust of wind and blow through a window. I've met them before.
They may be the most dangerous men in the world and they are certainly the most expensive.
The Taiytakei. We've always known what they want, haven't we? They want dragons. They
want hatchlings and they want potions and they want alchemists. Did you ever stop to wonder
what happened to our grand-master alchemist Bellepheros after your wedding? And ever
since, I've been asking myself: why did they give you such a priceless gift? Have you not
stopped to wonder about that?' Probably not. Too much vanity to question gifts, eh boy? 'So
they give you a priceless treasure and then they try to kill your wife. Why?' His eyes
narrowed. 'They want you with Zafir, but why? Why why why?'
'The Taiytakei?' Jehal for once looked like he barely knew where he was.
Poor boy. It's all getting too much, is it? 'If I were to guess, I would say that Zafir — or
someone — has promised them what they want.' Meteroa patted him on the shoulder. You
killed my brother. Not that he didn't deserve it, but he was mine. 'You wanted to be king,
remember? So now you have another reason to stop her.'
'Fine.' Jehal shrugged him off. 'Then get my dragons ready, Eyrie-Master. All of them. We're
going to war. How soon can it be done?'
'We're only waiting for you, Your Holiness, nothing else. Just one itsy question: who are we
fighting?'
For the first time since he'd landed, Jehal smiled. It was the twisted, lopsided smile of
someone who had something broken on the inside. Our family smile. 'Why, I'm going to the
Adamantine Palace, Uncle, to fight the speaker's war. You, though ... I have something else in
mind for you. You can take a few of my dragons and follow along later. Go via the Pinnacles
and clear the air for me there.' His smile slipped into a sneer. 'And if you really believe what
you say of the Taiytakei, you can burn every one of their ships in the harbour before you
leave.'
Meteroa felt himself nodding. 'To war then, my king?'
'To war.' Jehal threw back his head and laughed. 'Our war.' He nodded at the swollen body
laid out in the mausoleum. 'Now get
rid of that and bring me back my queen. Oh, and send a letter to Jaslyn. Tell her that from
now on wherever I go, her sister goes with me. Perhaps that will keep her dragons in their
eyries.'
'I wouldn't count on it.'
1 won t.

44

The Defiance of Kings
Vale Tassan stood in the Chamber of Audience. Arrayed in front of him was what passed for
yet another council of kings of queens. With one king and one queen. Worse than the council
that put Shezira to death. Nonetheless, he stood there and he told them what the speaker

wanted them to hear. They heard of two survivors from the Red Riders who had been taken
alive. Two survivors whose confessions Vale had taken. Whose confessions clearly
implicated Queen Almiri in their revolt. He watched them nod or shake their heads.
There. I have done my duty. I have obeyed my speaker without question. When he finished
there was a bitter taste in his mouth, but as he looked at their faces he understood perfectly
that the truth had never actually mattered in the first place. For some reason that made him
almost intolerably angry.
'Survivors?' Prince Tichane raised an eyebrow. 'From a dragon fight? That's quite unusual,
Night Watchman. What state were they in?'
They were dead. But I can't say that. 'Poor, Your Highness. Very poor. I was surprised that
they could be brought to talk at all.' 'Tooth marks?'
Vale bowed. 'I did not examine them, Your Highness. There was a physician. I'm sure he
could answer such questions.' Yes, let's bring the blood-mage up here and see what he has to
say for himself. He sighed and looked around the council. Half the realms don't even have a
voice here.
'Who here will speak for Queen Jaslyn and Queen Almiri?' asked Lord Eisal.
Zafir sniffed. 'They didn't come. That they cannot be bothered to even defend themselves
speaks of their guilt, does it not?'
F.isal glowered. 'Does Almiri even know we're holding this council? Does her sister?'
The Defiance of Kings
King Silvallan, King of Bazim Crag and the Oordish Moors and as much Zafir's puppet as
King Narghon was Jehal's, rolled his eyes and spat. 'What about her? Queen Almiri's guilt has
long been obvious, and she wouldn't act alone. I don't know why we're even bothering with
this.'
'We have no evidence at all against Queen Jaslyn, Your Holiness,' snapped Jeiros. 'And we're
bothering with this because we are the custodians of the nine realms and we have a sacred
duty to do whatever is possible to keep the realms at peace and prevent another dragon-war.'
'And yet here we are starting one,' drawled Prince Tichane. Another dragon-prince to despise.
Too much like Jehal in too many ways.
Zafir turned her smile on Jeiros. 'And what do you say regarding Queen Almiri, Master
Alchemist? Has she been helping the Red Riders or not? How is her supply of potions?
Missing any is she?'
Jeiros sank into his chair and shrugged his shoulders. 'I cannot say for sure. The Red Riders
stole most of what they need from you, Your Holiness. But yes, if I have to say one way or
the other, some are missing.'
As far as Vale could see that sealed Almiri's fate. As soon as he was no longer needed, he left
them to it. The south was going to war with the north. Zafir already had her dragons stationed
around the palace. Silvallan's were on the way. King Narghon and King Jehal would follow.
As many as seven hundred dragons would fly across the Purple Spur. Even if Queen Jaslyn
came to her sister's aid, they were still outnumbered two to one. From Eisal's face, King
Sirion planned to have no part of the fight either way. So the north would lose and that would
be that. Speaker Hyram's legacy would be over. Queen Shezira's line would be finished. And
in the middle, almost unnoticed, Evenspire and most of the Blackwind Dales would go up in
flames. Idly, Vale wondered how many people would burn and how many would starve. A
lot, most likely.
He climbed all the way to the top of the Gatehouse, its gates wide and tall enough to let in a
dragon. He stood on the battlements, close to the edge. There was hardly any space. Twenty
scorpions filled the platforms on the top of the Gatehouse towers.
He looked down The road from the palace gate curled away

to the right. The first things that caught his eye were the three cages. What was left of Queen
Shezira, King Valgar and Prince Sakabian. The crows had had their fill and there wasn't much
left but bones. He had other cages ready, just in case. There was one in particular that he'd
made for Princess Lystra. At least he wouldn't be needing that any more. When the news had
reached the palace of Lystra's murder, the speaker had beamed for days.
Beheading kings and hanging their bodies in cages. Executing her own cousins. Hyram would
never have done such things.
The road descended around the palace hill towards the City of Dragons and the Mirror Lakes.
The city still bore the scars of the Red Riders' attack. Zafir should have crushed them the
second they were born. Did she leave them just so that she could have her war?
Probably. Which meant that everyone who'd died in the city that day had died for Zafir's
vanity. Vale gritted his teeth. Orders, he reminded himself. The Guard obeys orders. From
birth to death. Nothing more, nothing less. It is not our place to praise or to condemn, merely
to execute the speaker's will.
Around to the south lay the Hungry Mountain Plain. Out in the distance, a wooden platform
still stuck up from the fields. The tower we built to celebrate the end of Speaker Hyram's
reign. Ten years of peace. We gave up our lives so that princes and kjngs could have sport
with their dragons, so that Hyram could show off how strong we are. And who won that
tournament? Zafir. She cheated and Hyram let her get away with it. He ought to have taken
the tower down, but somehow he'd never got around to it. Because there was always too much
else to do? No. Be honest with yourself, Vale Tassan. Because you can't quite let go of the
speaker you used to serve. Not for the one that's come in his place.
He turned his eyes to the north. Zafir would be flying that way soon. She'd be gone from the
palace. He looked along the walls. Three hundred scorpions and two thousand men. In the city
he could place five hundred more scorpions and the bulk of his soldiers. Putting more
scorpions up in the Spur near the mouth of the Diamond Cascade would be sound, although
he couldn't for the life of him think how to get them up there without getting some dragons to
carry them.
He stopped himself. What am I thinking? Am I really thinking
about the best ways to defend the palace? From whom, Night Watchman? From the King of
the Crags? Is that who you think you might need to fight? King Jehal? Do you think King
Sirion will try to seize the throne while Zafir is away? Or do you fear that Queen Jaslyn will
snatch a victory despite the numbers stacked against her? Because if you allow yourself to
have an opinion for a moment, any one of them, even the Viper, would make a better speaker
than Zafir. So are you really thinking of how to defend yourself against the multitude of
enemies that Zafir has made for us in the short months of her reign? Or are you thinking of
something else, Vale Tassan?
He stared at the scorpions lining the palace walls, at the bodies in the cages, at the black scars
in the City of Dragons and the tower on the plains, the last vestige of speaker Hyram's reign.
Orders. The Guard obeys orders. From birth to death. Nothing more, nothing less. It occurred
to him that while the Adamantine Men vowed to obey the speaker, the alchemists made a
different vow. Their vow was to serve the realms.
I thinks I like the alchemist vow better.
He turned back to look out over the palace. Someone else had slipped out of the council. Lord
Eisal, judging by his gait. Vale watched him come towards the Gatehouse. Eisal wasn't built
for speed, but he was doing his best. He looked furtive too. Anxious. Scared. Or is that my
imagination? Although we have just witnessed the start of a war, and it would only be proper
to be anxious. After all, it's not hard to imagine who's going to be next after the speaker's done
with Shezira's brood.

Eisal reached the stables and hurried inside. Going to the city, My Lord? Or to the eyrie? He
sighed. Could you not at least be a little less obvious? The council hasn't even dissolved and
here you are, rushing away. To whom, Lord Eisal? Now that I've seen you, I need to know to
whom. I don't suppose you'd care to save us both some trouble. I could simply ask and you
could simply tell me and then we could both be about our business.
No. Reluctantly, Vale stood up and stretched his legs. Then he ran down the steps to the foot
of the Gatehouse. Lord Eisal was already gone but the guard always kept a couple of mounts
saddled and ready in case the speaker needed to send an urgent message to any of her eyries.
Vale helped himself. He followed Eisal carefully,
discreetly, down into the City of Dragons. If Eisal was trying to be subtle then it was clearly
his first attempt. Mentally Vale was already seeing him hanging outside the gates in another
cage. Simply for being so inept. That would be reason enough.
Eisal rode into the circus at the heart of the city. In the centre an obsidian statue of a dragon
rose fifty feet into the air. Standing on the dragon's head was a man with a sword, poised to
bring his blade down into the monster's skull. The first Night Watchman, some said, slaying a
dragon with his bare hands.
Around the dragon, a ring of fountains chattered and bubbled, filling the circus with noise and
spray, adding to the damp that always filled the air from the Diamond Cascade above. Eisal
dismounted. He led his horse between the fountains and stopped beside the statue of the
dragon. Vale followed on foot, slipping purposefully through the loose crowds that always
thronged in the city centre. He didn't have to wait long to see who Eisal had come to meet.
Two men, tall, broad and unmistakable, detached themselves from the crowd and stood with
Eisal beside the dragon. The meeting lasted barely thirty seconds and Vale wasn't close
enough to hear anything that was said, but then he didn't need to be. He could see it. He could
see it in the faces of the riders at the statue. It is decided. The war is coming. That's what Eisal
was saying.
Vale lost interest in Eisal. He followed the two men as they walked away from the statue and
caught up with them halfway across the circus.
'What a fine afternoon,' he said when he was only a pace behind them. 'Wouldn't you say?'
The two men stopped. Very slowly they turned around. Vale had to force himself not to bow.
Bowing would draw attention, and he wasn't sure he wanted that. Not yet. He settled for a
slight nod of the head.
'Your Holiness. Forgive me if I intrude. King Sirion and Lord Hyrkallan. Two faces I had not
expected to see in the Circus of Dragons at this time and certainly not together.'
Hyrkallan's hand went to his sword. 'Night Watchman,' he growled. 'Well well. I sang your
praises to my last queen often enough but you are an unwelcome sight today.'
'I am called what I am called for a reason. Rider. When night
comes it falls to the Adamantine Men to keep watch over the nine realms. You will not deny
that the times are dark, I hope.' He glanced up at the statue. 'No one knows his name.
Whoever he was he certainly didn't kill a dragon by standing on its head and bashing it with a
sword. But the point remains.'
'You will not take us without a fight, Night Watchman,' said King Sirion. He spoke quietly.
He almost sounded sad, Vale thought.
'And I don't see your men, Vale.' Hyrkallan, on the other hand, sounded like two slabs of rock
grinding together. No sadness there. 'I followed Lord Eisal alone. On a whim, you might say.'
Hyrkallan's hand gripped the hilt of his sword. Vale smiled. 'Do you think you could, Rider?'
'I think I could try.'
'Oh, I don't doubt that. You might hold me long enough for King Sirion to get away. Or you
might not.' A flash of rage crossed Hyrkallan's face. Vale held up his hands. 'You don't need
to try, Rider. I was never here. You may go. I have nothing to say to either of you.' There. I

have betrayed my speaker. I have nowhere further to fall. He half turned and then stopped.
'No, I do have something to say to you. I have known you both through the reigns of two
speakers. You are men of courage and of honour. Although at the moment it does not, I hope
that the Adamantine Palace will one day welcome such men again. But I will say this to you.
Fight your wars in the skies if you must, but do not bring them here. If you do, you will find
that I have another name, one I wear for war.'
Hyrkallan almost grinned. 'If Zafir brings her dragons across the spur then I will meet them,
no matter what my queen has to say. But I give you my word, I will not bring them here
without your leave, Scorpion King.'
Vale smiled back. 'I hope your queen agrees with you, Rider.' He took a step away and then
gave a final nod. 'Your Holiness. Your Highness. I will pray to all our ancestors. Let there be
peace.' He glanced at King Sirion. 'Queen Shezira did not kill Hyram. I have very good reason
to believe that now, Your Holiness.'
He turned and walked away. There. And now a thousand people have seen the captain of the
Adamantine Men openly conspiring with enemies of the speaker. As far as I know, Zafir's still
offering her own
weight in gold for Hyrkallan's head. Sadly I don't have much use for gold. He walked back
across the circus and got back on his horse. I could still tell her though. Would there be
second thoughts? Would it make any difference if she knew that both Sirion and Hyrkallan
will be waiting for her across the mountains?
He mulled that over on his way back up the hill. By the time he reached the top, he knew the
answer. No, it wouldn't make any difference at all.
And that being the case, what would be the point in even mentioning it? He led his horse back
into the stables, stripped off its saddle and started to brush it down. Working with horses
always calmed him down. And when I'm done here, I suppose I'd better hurry and make
another cage. I won't fit in the one we made for Princess Lystra.
But first, there was the little matter of a war.

45

Viper Viper
Evenspire. Jehal slammed down his visor and plunged down through the air towards the city.
The wind made it almost impossible to think and he clung on, pressing himself against
Wraithwing, hugging the dragon's scales, trying to make sure there was no part of him that a
hunter might catch hold of with its tail. Six of Almiri's hunting dragons had come after him.
Four had lost their riders and were spiralling aimlessly towards the ground behind him. The
other two were right behind him. He felt the first blast of fire wash over him. His dragon-scale
armour kept the flames and the heat at bay. With his visor down he could barely see. For all
he knew, Almiri had more dragons hidden in the city waiting for him. That's what I'd do.
Outnumbered as she is, I'd try to kill me and I'd try to kill Zafir. And then I'd probably run
away. But where had they come from?
'Back up!' he hissed. The words were lost to the rush of air but that didn't matter. The dragon
would hear them even if he spoke in silence. 'Up! Up to the rest of the dragons!' Wraithwing
is a war-dragon. He's faster than they are. They've lost their advantage. All I have to do is fly
straight and level. Of course, that depends on how close they are, which I can't see ...
Wraithwing pulled sharply up and turned. Something wrenched at Jehal's harness, some
irresistible force. He felt straps and ropes tauten and snap. Nothing had a grip on him though.

He wasn't dead and he wasn't flying through the air. Some of the bindings that held him and
Wraithwing together had broken. Some, but not all. He clung on even tighter.
'Faster!' He had mounted two men on the dragon behind him. Their job was to keep watch
above and below and behind. If he'd
been from the north, they would have had scorpions as well. And
will I be thinking how noble and pure we are to fly without them when
a six-foot shaft tears me in two? The riders behind him had had another job too. Jehal didn't
dare lift his head to turn round in case the wind tore him out of his ruined harness. At a guess
though, they'd served that other purpose. At a guess they weren't there any more. Where had
Almiri's riders come from?
Burning the Taiytakei ships in the harbour was one of the most satisfying things Meteroa had
done in a very long time. It had an uncomplicated joy to it, the satisfaction of doing something
with extreme thoroughness and yet without effort. He burned them to the waterline and stayed
to watch them sink. The dragons had enjoyed it too. Something about ships rubbed dragons up
the wrong way. They'd liked playing with the sailors too, scooping the survivors out of the
water, tossing them into the air and eating them. That's what you get for trying to murder our
queen. What were you thinking?
That was the only fly left in the ointment but to Meteroa's mind it was a rather fat and ugly
one. Why had the Taiytakei done what they'd done? This wasn't the first time dragons had
flown out of Furymouth and burned the Taiytakei into the sea. They'd done it once before
when the Taiytakei had tried to destroy the silk factories on Tyan's Peninsula, but that had
been a couple of hundred years ago. When the Taiytakei had finally returned, it was to throw
their lot in with King Tyan and his clan. They'd supplied the poison that Jehal had used to
derange Hyram. They'd given him the magical dragons that he'd mostly used to spy on his
lover. It was a tense arrangement at best, since everyone knew that what the Taiytakei really
wanted were dragons and would do almost anything to get some, but it had served them well
enough during Ayzalmir's purges.
But why try to kill Lystra? To frame Zafir and drive them apart? Even the Taiytakei must
realise how unnecessary that was. Did they think it would somehow help Jehal to the throne?
And even then, what did that achieve? No. No, there had to be another reason, something to
do with getting hold of dragons. Dragons, hatchlings, eggs, everything. Someone had made
them a promise. Someone they believed.
So he burned their ships, taking pleasure in it, for good measure
he burned the harbour and the Taiytakei quarter of Furymouth while he was at it, and then
when he landed, he sent the palace soldiers out to finish the job. A crime, really, to destroy
part of his own city, but necessary. Whatever they were up to, he'd killed it; and that, for now,
would have to do. Until this stupid business with Zafir was finished at least.
The next day, with smoke still rising from the blackened patch of Furymouth closest to the
sea, Meteroa, Prince of Furymouth, flew north and then west. Taking the last few dragons
away from his beloved city felt like undressing her and leaving her naked. Exposed.
Vulnerable. It left a bad feeling in his gut which even destroying the Taiytakei hadn't cured.
Narghon's as good as family, he reminded himself. We're already going to war with Zafir and
Silvallan. The Taiytakei are gone. Who else is there? Even so, the feeling was still with him
when he reached the Pinnacles. Valmeyan. Sirion. The Syuss, even. He couldn't shake the
feeling that he'd never see his city again, not like she was.
Which was all the encouragement he needed to be on with his business quickly. It was dark
when he reached the Pinnacles and circled the three immense spires of stone that ringed
Zafir's city. A fortress was built on the top of each monolith, lit by fires. Battlements and
caves riddled their sheer sides, little pinpricks of light. They were the oldest places in the
realms. This was where the Silver King had come and where he'd died; where the dragons had

been broken, where the blood-mages had risen to power and fallen again, where the Order of
the Dragon had followed inexorably in their path. Narammed had lived here, and the first
King of the Crags too. Legend said that the three mountains were filled with tunnels, stocked
with enough food and with enough rooms to keep the entire city safe for a year, that they were
filled with ancient and arcane workings that even the alchemists were unable to fathom. This
was where the Reflecting Garden stood, with its fountains that never ran dry and its pool of
water whose surface wasn't flat. Far more than the City of Dragons or even the Adamantine
Palace or even the Glass Cathedral, the Pinnacles were the old heart of the realms, and only
kings and their personal escorts were allowed to land on them; even then it was considered
polite to ask first. Protocol.
Meteroa led his dragons towards them. Protocol could fuck itself.
Another wall of heat washed over him and then another. Jehal glanced up. The visor made
him almost blind and so he took a chance and raised it for a moment. He was in the wrong
place, separated from the bulk of his riders. At least they weren't in front of him, which meant
either they were behind him or something very bad had happened. He didn't dare look back ...
A thousand feet above the dark mounds of the Blackwind Dales, a thin blanket of morning
cloud smothered the sky. Jehal and Zafir and the dragons had come to Evenspire from above
it, from high out of the emptiness of the Desert of Stones. He'd been one of the first to punch
through the cloud, falling towards the ground like an arrow. Wraithwing had pulled up and
Jehal had watched the other dragons go. The sky was thick with them even now. Five
hundred, mostly his and Zafir's. They were like a plague. Wherever they went they ate
everything. The palace eyries had been stripped bare in a matter of days, their potions drunk
dry and their herds of cattle gone. The plague had crossed the Purple Spur into the dry plains
that sat between the Spur and Evenspire. There the dragons had spread out. They made their
way foraging in little clusters, falling out of the sky onto the tiny scattered bands of outsiders
who eked out their lives on the fringes of the desert. As far as Jehal knew, no one had had any
particular desire to lay waste to the southern half of Almiri's realm, but that's what they'd
done, more by accident than by design. Sated dragons fought harder than hungry ones.
No sign of Almiri. He'd held his position just below the cloud and signalled to his other riders
to do the same. Almiri's dragons hadn't been waiting for them above the cloud and they
weren't waiting here either. Let Zafir burn the citadel. Whoever won today, the city and the
eyrie around it would burn to the ground, that was inevitable. He wondered briefly if Almiri
had abandoned her stronghold and run off to hide with her sister. That would have been the
best thing she could have done for her people. Then the first of Zafir's riders had been greeted
by a volley of scorpions as they approached the walls. Jehal had watched as a single dragon
spiralled towards the ground. A lucky shot on a hunter with only one rider.
Or maybe she hadn't, but where were her dragons? He'd looked around him, and it had
occurred to him then that even if he saw them, how would he know? He didn't even know all
his own beasts. And then there was Prince Loatan with sixty of King Narghon's dragons, and
every single monster from Zafir's eyries. Silvallan had sent some seventy dragons under
Princess Kalista and he knew none of them. There were so many. He'd sat there on
Wraithwing's back, watching the palace below him burn, and wondered: How would I know if
I saw Almiri and her riders? He'd watched as the last half-dozen dragons drifted lazily out of
the cloud and veered towards him. I don't have the first idea who they are. For all I know,
those could be Almiri's riders. Prince Lai will be turning on his pyre.
The riders had signalled, telling him to go down to join the attack on the ground. Zafir's
dragons were almost there, converging on the cascading curtains of stone that were the Palace
of Paths. As he'd watched, the first blasts of fire bloomed in front of them. He'd been so busy
wondering how he'd know Almiri's dragons when he saw them that he didn't realise he was
looking right at them until much too late. The six hunters. Still signalling, still coming

towards him. Coming much too fast. He'd winced as he'd shouted at Wraithwing to dive and
dive hard. And so it had begun ...
Behind him he heard one of the hunters let out a series of shrieks and he suddenly knew
exactly where Almiri's dragons had been. They're not below the cloud and they're not above
the cloud. They're in the cloud.
On cue, three shapes dropped out of it in front of him. Oh, very clever.
Meteroa landed with three dragons and a dozen riders on the largest of the three Pinnacles, the
Fortress of Watchfulness. The people he was looking for might be here or they might be at the
Palace of Pleasure on the second Pinnacle. He rather doubted that he'd find them on the third,
in the Temple of Tranquillity. Soldiers came running out dragging scorpions behind them,
rather too late to do any good.
If I'd planned to burn everything from the skies, that is. He snapped his fingers and his dragon
lowered its head as any well-trained
dragon should do. More dragons circled above, almost invisible in the night sky, little more
than the occasional black silhouette blotting out a star. Meteroa climbed down from the
dragon's back. He stroked its scales. You don't like the dark, do you? But you'll still fly if I
tell you to. Once we're done with you, you're not much different from dogs and horses, are
you? Don't think I don't know what you'd be like if we didn't keep you docile. The alchemists
are right to be afraid of you.
He looked at the soldiers and the Scales and the pathetic collection of riders that had emerged
to greet him. He didn't recognise a single face. Zafir had taken every rider who could fight
away with her to Evenspire. Which is going to make my life so much easier.
'I am Prince Meteroa, brother to the late King Tyan. I am King Jehal's eyrie-master. We ride
to war at the speaker's call. I require food and sustenance for my dragons and my riders and
an audience with Prince Kazalain.'
The riders shuffled uneasily. One of them stepped forward. Meteroa peered at him. The face
wasn't familiar but his eyes were sharp. He was old and walked awkwardly, which was
presumably why Zafir had left him behind. 'In Queen Zafir's absence, Princess Kiam rules
here,' said the rider. He bowed as he spoke, but his eyes never left Meteroa's face.
'And will I find her here or in the Palace of Pleasure?'
The rider bowed again. 'I do not know where you will find her, Your Highness, but it will not
be here.'
Meteroa threw up his hands in exaggerated exasperation. 'Shall I spend the night searching for
your errant princess? I have better things to do and my men are soldiers not errand boys. Is
Prince Kazalain here?' He'd better be. 'My words are for him, not some little girl.'
'He's here, Your Highness,' said the rider. He sounded reluctant.
'Well, then go and get him.'
There wasn't anywhere else for him to go. Jehal plunged down again, the force of
Wraithwing's turn pitching him back with such force that he was surprised it didn't snap his
spine. He screamed as something ripped and his injured leg was suddenly stabbing burning
agony. He gestured frantically, hoping some of his riders
would see and follow him towards the ground. Principles said that he should keep his riders
high and simply sit there and take it from the dragons hidden in the clouds. We need to be low
enough to see them coming. Then we can fight them. He brought the visor down again and
trusted Wraithwing to level out safely above the city instead of smashing into the ground.
Jehal was still gasping from the pain in his leg when Wraithwing spread out his wings again
and he pitched forward. His eyes bulged and the world went red for a moment as his ribs were
pushed flat. Then the feeling went. Dazed, he leaned forward and urged the dragon on, over
the column of smoke and flames that had been the Palace of Paths. The wind battered at him.
Whatever would burn was burning. The scorpions on the walls were gone, smashed to bits or

sitting limp and idle, surrounded by the charred husks of the soldiers who had manned them.
Most of Almiri's men would have fled down into the tunnels under the citadel; that was to be
expected. Zafir wouldn't worry about that. Two thousand of the Adamantine Men were on the
march to mop up the survivors and hold the citadel once Almiri had been burned out of it.
Once we've done with you. But the soldiers wouldn't get here for days. Until then dragons
would have to do.
He glimpsed Onyx, Zafir's war-dragon, circling low along the walls. Jehal could almost taste
her delight as she swept arcs of fire about her as she went. He drove Wraithwing towards her
and then into the plumes of smoke and into a cloud of a hundred circling dragons. With a bit
of luck that would shake Almiri's riders off his tail. After he'd passed through, he started to
climb back towards his own dragons. He took a deep breath, sat up, opened his visor and
looked behind him. He was breathing hard. Everything hurt. He was ready to be sick. But at
least he was still alive.
The hunters who'd been chasing him were gone. For a moment he was alone. He took a few
breaths to let his racing heart slow. He was sweating, exhausted, and he hadn't even done
anything yet except run away. Below him the rest of Zafir's dragons, the ones that weren't
destroying the citadel, were loose over the city. There wasn't any pattern or order to what they
were doing. They were
hunters mostly, Iooking for any sign of Almiri and her soldiers. So
far they hadn't set the city hopelessly ablaze, but that was surely
only a matter of time. Jehal wondered for a fraction of a second whether the people who lived
there had had any warning of what was to come. Probably not, he supposed.
He looked up again, turning Wraithwing back towards his own riders. And ducked as a
dragon tail sliced the air barely yards away from his face.
'Vishmir's cock! What does it take?' He swore some more but these dragons weren't coming
for him. They rained past him, another cluster of Almiri's hunters from the clouds, arrowing
down towards the citadel. For a few seconds he was too stunned that he was still alive to
think. Then he saw where they were going. They were aiming straight for Onyx.
Jehal watched in stupefied disbelief. Without thinking what he was doing, he turned
Wraithwing and dived after them. He felt something that was almost panic. He wasn't going
to catch them in time. And all the time a part of him was screaming, Why are you chasing
them? They're only doing exactly what you were going to do! Let them do it! Except that
wasn't what he wanted. He'd come to the battle with every intention of betraying Zafir and
smashing her dragons to the ground as soon as the battle was won. And now Almiri's doing it
for me, and I'm trying to save her. What sort of idiot does that make me?
He pulled Wraithwing up. The hunters were far too far ahead. They'd fallen like stones all the
way from the clouds and he had no chance of catching them. All he could do was watch.
Eventually Prince Kazalain appeared. Meteroa almost didn't recognise him. He looked old and
broken. He tried to smile, but his face struggled as if he'd forgotten how.
'Prince Meteroa.' The usual disgust wasn't there. Kazalain only looked sad.
'I'm just an eyrie-master, Your Highness. You look terrible. The months since King Jehal's
wedding have not been kind to you. You look ten years older.' Meteroa reached out a hand.
'I'm sorry for your loss.'
Kazalain spat. 'No, you're not, Prince Meteroa. You hardly knew my son Sakabian. He was
foolish, but he didn't deserve to hang in a cage over the speaker's g.ates.'
'Neither did Queen Shezira or King Valgar for that matter, but little things like that don't seem
to bother your queen.' 'Mind your tongue.'
'Why? Will you cut it out because I say that your son's death was unjust?'
'You should not be here, and you should not be saying these things.' Kazalain turned away.
'Be gone!'

'I require food and sustenance for my dragons and my riders, Kazalain. We are going to war.'
Kazalain waved vaguely at the city below. 'At the city eyrie, Meteroa. You know that. Don't
ask the alchemists for any of their potions though. They barely have enough to feed the
hatchlings. We have none to spare.'
'You still have your other sons. You should not forget them. Vishmir and Lai, isn't it? Named
after the shining lights of Furymouth's past. Good names. Are they here?'
'Of course they're here. You think I'd let them stray from me after what our queen did to
Sakabian.' He stopped and turned back again. 'Why do you ask?' Something in Meteroa's tone
must have caught his attention. I'll have to pay more attention to that sort of thing.
'You could wonder about that. Or you could wonder about the fact that I'm dressed in dragonscale while you and your soldiers are not, eh?' He gave Kazalain an instant to understand what
was about to happen and then dropped to one knee and flicked his fire visor closed.
Fire poured from the dragons behind him. The force of it plucked him right off the ground and
threw him ten feet forward. The noise left his ears ringing. When he got up, he staggered. If
any of Kazalain's soldiers were still alive, they could have killed him as easily as killing a
child.
Well I won't be doing that again. Meteroa lifted up his visor. The soldiers and Kazalain were
all dead, burned to the bone. Meteroa knelt down beside Kazalain and patted what was left of
his head. Charred bits fell off in his hand.
'I wouldn't want any heirs escaping to make a nuisance of themselves, dial's why.' He gave the
dead prince a wan smile. 'I'll be kinder to them than Zafir was to Sakabian. At least I can
promise you that. Their deaths will be as quick and painless as yours.'
He took his time. A few riders stayed on the backs of their dragons to keep watch. Others
moved methodically through the eyrie, rounding up the Scales and the alchemists and anyone
too stupid to run into the stone embrace of the fortress. Most of the rest raced down into the
depths of the Pinnacles. That was the trick with this place. Get in fast and deep before they
even knew you were here. Otherwise they could simply shut you out. As long as he stopped
them from doing that, the rest could wait until he'd had time to bring soldiers up from
Furymouth. Jehal had sent a couple of hundred cavalry, who would arrive in a few days. The
remainder would have to march on foot. But I have time. Hither Jehal has succeeded or he's
dead, and if he's dead I might wish I hadn't burned all those Taiytakei ships yesterday
morning.
When he was done he mounted up and took to the air again. His riders knew what to do. Most
stayed to hold the eyrie, but a few joined him back in the air. As they circled down, fire
bloomed around the edge of the city below. There go the whores and all the riders who were
lying with them. Never much cared for their kind. To get himself in the mood, he flew over
the flames and through the smoke. The smell of it set his blood pumping, even more than
burning the Taiytakei had done. There was something primal about dragon-fire, something
that tore off the thin mask of order that governed the realms and exposed the raw chaos
lurking beneath. And once in a while we let the madness out to wreak its havoc, and then we
carefully put it away again, locked up until the next time.
A dozen of his dragons had already landed in the city eyrie. Zafir had taken almost all her
dragon-knights north to fight Almiri. Seizing her city was turning out to be even easier than
Meteroa had thought it would be. He circled the second of the Pinnacles, the Palace of
Pleasure, urging his dragons up around the sheer face of the rock. Here and there he caught
sight of windows, of little platforms, of tiny passageways carved into the cliffs, given away by
the firelight that shone from within. Every one he saw, he burned. He didn't have the men to
even try and hold another of the three Pinnacles, so a different approach would have to sulfur.
When they finally reached the lop, .1 thousand feet above the

plains below, a handful of soldiers and half a dozen scorpions were waiting for him. Or
maybe it was more; in the darkness, Meteroa couldn't see them, but nor could they see him.
He heard them shouting and he heard the sounds of the scorpions firing. He had no idea
whether they'd hit anything or whether they'd even come close. Then his dragons enveloped
the entire palace in flames. Meteroa had to put his visor down simply to'block out the glare.
When it faded, there were no more shouts and no more scorpions, only screams. When even
those stopped, Meteroa landed.
'Right!' he shouted for the benefit of anyone who was listening. 'Message for Princess Kiam.
Your uncle's dead. You've got one hour to surrender yourself before I set fire to your sister's
city.'
With that, he settled back to wait.
Zafir couldn't have even seen Almiri's dragons coming. The six of them fell out of the air
straight at Onyx. Two of them smashed into him and glanced off, somersaulting through the
air and almost crashing into the ruined palace below. Onyx lurched towards the ground. A
third hunter ploughed into him, ripping the scorpioneer off his back. The fourth crushed his
other riders and finally forced him to land. The fifth and then the sixth landed on top of him
before he could move. Zafir's dragons were onto them in seconds, but they were far too late.
By then everyone on the black dragon's back had been ripped to pieces.
Jehal threw back his head and screamed, '/ had to do that. Me! She was miner He tore down
again, chasing after the hunters that had killed Zafir. They were trying to scatter but Zafir's
war-dragons were already there. By the time Wraithwing arrived there wouldn't be anything
left but scraps. Too late. The damage is done. Almiri wins ... But now there are seven riderless
dragons sitting on the ground, waiting to be taken.
For the second time he pulled Wraithwing up short and started to climb again. For all his rage,
Almiri's riders had done him a favour. After all, isn't that exactly what I wanted? And now I
don't have to do it myself. I don't have to find out what it would have felt like to watch
Wraithwing rip her to pieces right in front of me.
Or, if you looked at what had happened in a different way, Almiri had made him look
hopelessly incompetent. He had some
two hundred dragons circling below the clouds to stop exactly this from happening and they'd
failed. And how do I retort? Do I say that I didn't give a shit what Almiri did to Zafir, since
that just spared me the trouble of doing it myself? Ancestors! I couldn't even protect myself.
But how did Almiri kttow where to strike, and when?
He looked up at his dragons, still circling aimlessly, still waiting for orders. How many does
Almiri have left? Sixty? Seventy? And then the dragons she took from Prince Sakabian. Less
than a hundred. She'd be mad to launch herself at us now. She's done as much damage as she
could hope for. Zafir is dead. The speaker. The war is over, even if the battle still rages. She
should know that. There's nothing more she can do.
If he pretended for a moment that Almiri didn't exist then there really wasn't much point
waiting around any longer. Zafir's riders must have taken the citadel by now. They'd be
landing, mopping up any survivors too stupid to hide in the deep tunnels. They'd be
wondering what on earth to do next. He took a deep breath.
Almiri has done my workfor me. I could leave quietly. Return to the Adamantine Palace.
Return to Furymouth. There would be a council of kings and queens to choose Zafir's
successor. It's hard to see who it would be. Sirion, perhaps? Narghon? Silvallan? Not me
though. They won't choose me. Not like this. No speaker's throne for dithering King Jehal.
And that, in the end, was the whole reason he was here. He reached his dragons and signalled.
It was what they'd been waiting for. Almost as one, they turned and dived towards the ground
to smash the remnants of Zafir's reign to pieces.

46

The Red Prince
High above the cloud where the dry desert air was thin and the sky was so blue that it hurt his
eyes, Prince Hyrkallan flew. Prince Hyrkallan now and soon to be king. He understood why
Queen Jaslyn had offered herself to him — she needed him simply to survive. He understood,
but it didn't matter. He'd given himself a single day to consider her proposition, what it would
mean to accept and what it would mean to reject her. In the end the decision was easy. If he
turned his back on her, the realm would fall apart. Jaslyn would fall, a hundred pretenders to
the throne of Sand and Stone would crawl out from their holes. There would be blood and
chaos, and all the while Speaker Zafir would be laughing at them.
No, he had only one choice and so he committed himself to it with all his heart and vowed to
make Jaslyn into a queen to make her mother proud. So while Jaslyn remained closeted away
in her eyrie, he'd flown, in person and in secret, to King Sirion. He'd gone with almost nothing
to offer, yet Sirion had listened, and when Hyrkallan had finished, King Sirion had nodded.
They would go to war together.
'Why?' Hyrkallan had asked, and Sirion had shaken his head.
'Because of the Red Riders. Because you knew what was right.' And then he'd done the
strangest thing. He'd bowed and taken Hyrkallan's hand. 'Shezira should have followed
Hyram but she's dead. Now it will be you.'
All that was before they'd slipped into the City of Dragons and the Night Watchman had
almost begged them to overthrow Zafir. Another man might have felt the hand of destiny
resting lightly on his shoulder. To Hyrkallan, it was all simply justice. Justice and Vengeance,
exactly as he'd promised.
He looked around behind him. Nearly four hundred dragons. Not as many as Zafir would have
and so he'd planned his attack
with care. Almiri didn't know he was coming. There would be no pitched battle to save
Evenspire from the flames. The city would be sacrificed. Then, as Zafir revelled in her
victory, he would fall out of the skies on her and crush her.
Far above the cloud, where the air was thin and the sky was so blue that it hurt his eyes,
Prince Hyrkallan felt a deep sense of calm as he signalled his dragons down. They'd flown as
high as they had in the hope of evading any eyes that Zafir had left to keep watch; now they
fell at such speed that the wind ripped the air out of their lungs. All Hyrkallan could see was
cloud, but the dragons knew. They had an instinct for where things were, as though they could
sense their own kind, and knew they were coming for a fight. Hyrkallan could feel it from
them - the tension, the anticipation, the hunger, the joy.
Four hundred dragons plunged into the cold damp cloud and disappeared. Seconds later they
burst out directly over Evenspire.
Wraithwing banked and twisted, spraying fire at one of Zafir's riders who hadn't had the sense
to run away. Jehal caught a glimpse of another cluster of dragons racing towards him, but
before he could even start to see whose they were, Wraithwing shot through a cloud of smoke
and he couldn't see anything. When his eyes cleared, those dragons were gone. Another
dragon, one of Zafir's, raced overhead with two of Jehal's riders in pursuit. Below, the city
was burning now, burning with a vengeance.
Once again I haven't the first idea what's going on. Are all dragon-fights like this? Principles
made them sound like carefully choreographed dance where the winner was decided before
the contest even began. Not this. This was anarchy. Madness! For a moment, Jehal found
himself wondering whether Prince Lai had ever actually fought in the War of Thorns or

whether he'd just watched it all, scratching his chin. He dragged Wraithwing higher above the
city. At least from a thousand feet, just below the cloud, he could see what was happening.
And what use is that? I can see lots of dragons chasing each other. I don't know which ones
are mine and which are Zafir's. They disappear in and out of clouds and plumes of smoke with
such speed that I couldn't follow them even if I tried. I can see a good few dragons fleeing the
battle. I assume that they're Zafir's
and that we're winning, but I don't even know that for sure. Ancestors! How embarrassing
would that be? To loiter up here feeling all smug and sure of myself only to discover that all
my riders have run away and Zafir has won even though she's dead. I suppose I could try and
signal some orders. Or I could get Wraithwing to shriek them out, but what use would that be?
Apart from the twenty dragons circling in overwatch, who would actually see or hear me?
There were some things in Principles, right at the start, that he'd have to look at. Things about
the preparations to be made before a battle. When this was done, he'd have to read that bit
again.
Enough of this. He signalled to the riders on overwatch to follow him and thundered back
down towards Almiri's citadel. At least she's had the sense to go away, now she's done what
she's done. Or is she still up there in the cloud, lurking and watching? You know what, when
I'm done here, I'm going to go away. You can have your city and your palace back again.
What's left of them.
If he thought the fighting over the city was chaos, the scenes in the citadel made him dizzy.
Even before Wraithwing landed, the heat of the fires penetrated his armour. The smoke
burned his throat and the air was so hot that it hurt to breathe. His visor didn't help; using it
just meant that he couldn't see anything at all, as opposed to getting fleeting glimpses of
things through the occasional gap in the smoke. He took his helmet off, wiped the tears from
his eyes and waved at his other riders as they came in to land.
'Dragons!' he shouted. 'Get the dragons.' Almiri's hunters were still perched around the citadel,
moping near the bodies of their riders or what was left of them. The fire didn't seem to trouble
them, but even if it did they'd only sit there and howl until someone came to take them away.
That's what we train them to do. Stupid. You'd have thought they'd know to give up when all
that's left of their rider is half a charred arm.
'Dragons!' he shouted again. 'Get the dragons and get them out of here.' He waved his riders
closer. Dragon cries were drowning his words. 'Can you hear me?'
He had to practically shout in their ears, one at a time, to make himself understood. 'Get the
dragons. Any dragon you see. Get it back in the air. Get everyone else back into the sky. I've
had enough of this. Tell them to take what spoils they can and leave! Get Onyx.'
He had to point. 'The big black one. Through the smoke that way. Get Zafir's dragon.' As an
afterthought, he limped after the two riders he'd sent for Onyx. There was always a chance
that he might find Zafir's body. The more proof he had that she was dead, the easier the rest of
this was going to be.
He didn't even get halfway there before a subtle change in the dragon cries around him made
him look up.
The sky was raining dragons again. White ones! Hundreds of them.
B'thannan pulled out of his dive; Hyrkallan lifted his visor and there was the ground, a
thousand feet below. Evenspire was burning and there was no dragon overwatch. And as he
looked, he slowly understood what he was seeing: Jehal and Zafir were fighting over the
spoils. A warmth blossomed inside him. He wanted to shout for joy, and even, maybe, believe
in that hand of destiny after all.
'Remember me?' he roared into the wind. 'The whole fucking horde of the north with me, five
hundred dragons and fifty thousand men. That was my promise!'

And as the dragons of the north rained from the clouds he waved them on towards the ground
to grind his enemies to pieces. Unlike Jehal, Hyrkallan knew exactly which were his dragons.
His dragons had their bellies painted white and his riders wore red.
'Oh shit! Get up! Get up and get out!' Jehal screamed at his riders, urging them into the air.
Could I be in a worse place? Yes, I suppose I could be lying spreadeagled in a field with a big
sign reading 'Please burn me' hanging over my head. Other than that, it's hard to see ... He
wasn't going to reach Wraithwing before the northern dragons reached the ground, so he
didn't try; instead he hid behind a wall until he saw a white-painted dragon shoot overhead. At
least I know exactly how difficult it is to see anything down here. A shift in the wind blew
smoke over him. He took the opportunity to hobble across the open to where Wraithwing was
waiting, cursing his ruined leg. The noise was deafening, dragons howling, everything
burning. He caught a glimpse of Onyx launching into the air, little more than a large black
shape in the shilling smoke.
'Let me on, let me on!' Jehal waved franntically. Wraithwing
knew he was there, Jehal could see that, but the dragon was very slow to move. He seemed
almost stunned, dazed and dopey but somehow blissfully happy. I must be imagining that bit,
but I'd really appreciate it if you'd bother to actually open your eyes.
Wraithwing lowered his head. Jehal grabbed hold of the dangling rope ladder and hauled
himself onto Wraith wing's back, strapping himself into what was left of his harness. 'Up!
Up!' Shit. And I thought it was already madness. Wraithwing powered into the sky. With no
one to look out for him, Jehal's head twitched from side to side, up and down, searching for
the next dragon that would try to kill him. At least painting their dragons white means I know
which ones those are likely to be. Except for any of Zafir's riders who haven't had the sense to
run away — let's not forget them just yet. He wondered briefly who was up there. Sirion.
Jaslyn. Hyrkallan. All of them, most likely. Which one of them is leading the charge? That
thought made him shudder. Lystra's bloodthirsty sister, most likely.
He urged Wraithwing across the city as fast as he could, shrieking and waving the retreat,
calling to his riders to gather around him and flee. Safer just to run away on my own, but then
what? He caught another glimpse of Onyx and veered towards the black monster. I need you.
I need you with me to show that Zafir is dead. White-painted dragons were swirling towards
Onyx as well. Jehal had maybe a hundred of his own around him. Half of what I came with.
Ancestors, but I hope that's not all there is. And of course every one that I lose is one that the
north gains. Maybe they'll fall out with each other just like we did. They won't, but imagining
it will make me feel better about this later. There would be others, other survivors. There
always were. Principles told him that he could expect to see maybe half as many again trickle
their way back to him.
Time to leave. Wraithwing powered up towards the cloud. The painted dragons nibbled at the
edges of Jehal's formation, happy to keep him in one place while they mopped up the
remnants still flashing across the burning city. Then suddenly they were in the cloud, and
even with his visor up, Jehal could barely see the dragons flying next to him. Not that it made
much difference. The wind would blind him anyway. He closed the visor. Riders hated
clouds. Clouds ruined formations. You never knew what was on the other side. Even the very
air itself was funny inside a cloud. Principles,
for example, gave dire warnings about flying in clouds. Principles, Jehal decided, could go
fuck itself. Formations were for dragons flying to battle, not ones flying away from it. If Jehal
couldn't see any other dragons then no other dragons could see him. What couldn't see him
wouldn't try to eat him, and that was quite good enough. The dragons themselves didn't seem
to mind at all. They always managed to stay together, as though they could sense each other.
Jehal had no idea how they did it. As far as he knew, nor did anyone else.

A few very long seconds later he heard a dragon shriek. Three short cries. His own riders,
signalling that the danger was over. The cry was echoed over and over. In the strange air of
the cloud the calls sounded dull and flat. He took a deep breath and let Wraithwing guide
himself south. Towards the Silver River and the Great Cliff and the Purple Spur and home. Is
this as bad as it seems? What did I come here to do? I came to destroy Zafir and Zafir is no
more. So is this victory? I came to take her dragons and there I've largely failed. Does that
matter? I've taken some of hers and lost some of my own, and if I'm lucky I'll leave with as
many as I brought. Maybe even more. So, greed aside, and ignoring the little inconvenience
offleeing from the battle with my tail between my legs, this is mostly the outcome I was
looking for, right? So not that bad, right?
He sniffed at his own stupidity. Yes yes. You keep thinking that, King Jehal. Maybe if you
quietly gloss over the bit where you got beaten and humiliated, everyone else will gloss over
it too. Or maybe you should start thinking about what exactly you're going to do that's going
to stop Queen Jaslyn from hanging you in a cage beside the bones of her mother. Because if
there's one thing you can be sure of now, it's that the Queen of Stone is coming.
After an hour Hyrkallan called an end to the pursuit. The cloud made it impossible to know
where Jehal really was. His dragons would be scattered. They might emerge from the cloud
anywhere. If there was any fighting at all, it would be scattered little skirmishes, nothing
more. If Hyrkallan was lucky, Jehal and Zafir were both dead. If they weren't, the north had
cause enough to strip Zafir of her office.
And now, at last, the power to do it. It was tempting to fly straight
on, to cross the Purple Spin and put an end to Zafir and her riders once and for all. To do it
right now. He might even have done it, except the defeated dragons wouldn't be the only ones
waiting for him. Fight your wars in the skies if you must, but do not bring them here or you
will find that I have other names, and one of them I wear for war. The words of the Night
Watchman, the Scorpion King.
No. No need for that. No need for more. No need to risk turning this victory into a defeat.
Besides, he had other matters to attend to. Rounding up a hundred new dragons, the ones Zafir
and Jehal had left behind as they fled.
When all that was done, he landed B'thannan on the outskirts of the city and sniffed the air.
Smoke. Even upwind of the flames, the air reeked of it. Evenspire was dead. In a few days,
when the fires were out and the wind next came out of the mountains, it would lift up the
ashes and carry them away to the desert. Everyone who saw would remember how the
Blackwind Dales earned their name, but by then Hyrkallan would be gone, away to drag
Queen Jaslyn from her dragons and put an end to whatever it was she was doing out in
Outwatch.
And then, Vale Tassan, I will come, and we will see how stubborn you are prepared to be.

47

The Adamantine Palace
Vale stood on top of the Gatehouse and watched the dragons land. Jeiros was beside him.
'Do you have enough potion to feed them, Master Alchemist?' He watched Jeiros' face, and
knew the answer before the alchemist even opened his mouth. No.
'It will be a challenge, Night Watchman.'
'It will, won't it?'

'The Red Riders, the damage done at the redoubt, so many dragons flying to war. Zafir asks
more than I can give. I will have to take supplies from her and from King Silvallan. King
Jehal too, perhaps. From Evenspire, if there is anything left of it.' The alchemist sighed. 'It's
becoming more of a problem than you would care to know, Night Watchman. But I will keep
our speaker's dragons flying no matter what I have to do.'
Vale laughed. 'There don't seem to be many of our speaker's dragons left. I haven't been
counting, but I'd say this is a third of the number that left. Unless I'm mistaken, most of them
are King Jehal's.'
'Onyx is there.'
'Yes.' The speaker's dragon. Maybe another couple of dozen of Zafir's. A few dragons I don't
recognise at all. And all the rest are Jehal's. And I have been counting. More than a hundred
dragons lost? Someone's been very careless. I fear a veritable forest of cages.
The first riders were galloping up the hill from the landing fields as if they were still being
chased. Vale wanted to laugh at them. You lost, didn't you? Sirion and Hyrkallan were
waiting for you and you lost. He nudged Jeiros. 'If I were you, Grand Master, I would keep
very much out of the way for the next few days. I don't think our speaker has had a good
week.' I le walked briskly to the stairs. With jeiros safely behind him and no one watching, he
permitted the grin that he'd been wearing on the inside to show itself on the outside. He wore
it lot exactly as long as it took him to reach the bottom of the stairs. In the Gateyard outside,
Adamantine Men were already forming up to grert their speaker on her return. Only a few of
them though. Not enough that I might he accused of weakening the walls. Vale looked them
up and down until he was sure they were perfect and then stood at (heir head and waited. The
palace gates opened and a few dragon-knights rode in. They looked beaten. You can see it in
their eyes, in the way they carry themselves. You lost and you lost badly.
Zafir wasn't with them. What he got was King Jehal. Vale bowed. Pity. I rather hoped you
wouldn't come back'Zafir is dead,' said Jehal brusquely. He looked as though he was in a lot of pain, sitting up on
the back of his horse. Two of his riders helped him to dismount and he nearly collapsed. Even
standing still he had to lean heavily on his staff. Vale watched him struggle. He kept carefully
silent. I did that to him. We will both remember that.
'The speaker is dead,' said Jehal, this time making it sound more of a declaration than a
confession. 'We met in battle over Evenspire. We fought and I won, and by right of conquest I
claim the speaker's throne until there can be a council of kings and queens to choose a
successor. I call for such a council.' Jehal finally locked eyes with Vale. 'Night Watchman,
that means you. Get Jeiros and Aruch and anyone else who needs to hear my claim. I'll gladly
repeat it once. After that I shall become annoyed. I will retire to the Tower of Dusk for now
but I expect the Speaker's Tower to be ready for me in two days. Am I understood?'
Vale bowed again. He took a step to the side and turned, a little ritual to acknowledge that
whoever stood at the palace gates was welcome to enter. As though you were her husband —
I have not forgotten. He waited until Jehal was level with him.
'Is there a body, Your Holiness?' he asked.
Jehal stopped. He whipped around to glare at Vale. 'She was ripped to pieces and eaten.'
'The Lesser Council will convene to hear your claim, Your Holiness. They will ask.'
'I have her dragon, Tassan, That's all that's left of her.'
'You don't have the Speaker's Ring then? Do you have her spear at least?'
'She was flying to war, Night Watchman; she left that here. Why don't you get it for me?'
Vale was careful not to smile. He bowed his head. 'I will call the Lesser Council, Your
Holiness. I shall ask them to convene tomorrow at dawn. May I ask what became of
Evenspire? And of the treacherous Queen Almiri? They will ask that too.'

'Evenspire lies in ashes, Night Watchman, and you can request they convene sooner than that.
As for Almiri, she was no traitor and I have no idea if she's dead. If it amuses you, I shall
guess and say she is still alive.'
Vale bowed. 'As you command, Your Holiness. The Lesser Council may ask for more
evidence than your word and a dragon, but I shall convey your words.' Arrogant prick. Do
you really think I'm going to let you have Zafir's throne? You, of all people? He watched
Jehal limp slowly across the Gateyard towards the Tower of Dusk. At least at the speed he
now moved, the servants there would have plenty of time to get ready for him. When Jehal
was gone he sent his soldiers back to their duties and then went looking for Jeiros. The
alchemist was where he'd left him, still standing on top of the Gatehouse. Vale settled beside
him, watching the dragons at the palace eyries.
'The little shit wants us to make him speaker.' He watched Jeiros' face carefully. The
alchemist did well. He blinked a few times, that was all.
'Zafir is dead then?'
'So he says. He says he fought her himself and demands her throne by right of conquest until a
full council can be called.' 'He knows his history.'
'He knows his Principles. I don't think he knows much of anything else, and the best I can
think of to do with Principles is to wipe my arse with it.'
The alchemist shrugged. 'There is a precedent. The realms need a speaker.'
Vale spat. 'He can't even prove that Zafir is dead. He's got her dragon. He doesn't have her
ring.'
'The spear?'
'He says she left it here.
Jeiros turned towards Vale and frowned.. 'Does he? I throught so too, but it's not here, It
should be in Chamber of Audience but it's not. I assumed Zafir took it with her.
'He wants me to call the Lesser Council.'
'Which means you and me.'
'And Aruch, who will do what you tell him.' Vale permitted himself a smile. 'Your choice,
Grand Master. Who's it going to be?'
'What would you do, Vale?'
'Me?' Vale laughed. 'I might thank him for ridding us of Zafir, but I'd still hang him in one of
her cages outside the gates. Frankly I'd hang them both. Evenspire burns, he says. A city full
of people set to flames and for what? Yes, if it was me I'd craft a cage for him with my own
hands. But then I'm not entitled to an opinion, I'm just a servant.'
Jeiros pursed his lips. Vale could see a lot of thinking going on. 'The realms need a speaker,
Vale. The battle went badly, even I can see that. He has Zafir's dragon. Some will say that is
proof enough. If we refuse him, what then? We stand alone against every realm and that is not
our duty; our duty is to keep the realms' dragons in check. Yet as you said, Vale, when a
dragon burns you, it makes little difference whether it has a rider on their back as it does so;
the flames are still the same. This war must end now. Jehal was trying to do that. That's why
Zafir put him in the Tower of Dusk. No, I will not stand in his way. I dare say he will not
survive a vote from the full council when one can finally be called. Until then, any speaker is
better than none.'
'Even the Viper?'
'Even the devil, Night Watchman.'
Vale shrugged. 'Then I will bow to your wisdom, Master Jeiros. The next time you stand here,
you may be able to see me in one of those cages out there.'
'Jehal needs you. I will not allow it.'
'But he will be speaker. He will not need our opinions.'

Jeiros cocked his head. 'I think in these unusual times he might find that he does. See it this
way, Vale. See him as ours. The speaker is always as much a servant of the realms as you or
I.'
'I somehow doubt King Jehal will agree.'
'Then we will make him. Besides, however much we may wish for it, we cannot be sure that
Speaker Zafir is dead. If she was eaten in battle we may not be sure for a very long time. I
think King Jehal can merely act as a speaker under our guidance until we are. There are
precedents here too.'
The Night Watchman laughed. 'Until some dragon shits out the Adamantine Spear? You've
come a long way, Grand Master.'
'I wonder sometimes if the realms wouldn't be better off without dragons. If I knew of a way
we could rid ourselves of them, I think I would do it. But we can't. They always come back.'
'So Jehal gets what he wants.'
'Under sufferance, Vale. But yes, for now he does. I see no other choice.'
One false move, Viper, and nothing will save you. Vale smiled to himself. 'If you find that
you do not have enough potion and it is necessary to poison a few of them to keep their
numbers down, I will do nothing to stand in your way. I thought you might want to know
that.'
Jehal lay on his bed in the Tower of Dusk. His sickbed, where Jeiros had tended to his wound.
He stared at the ceiling. This is the last time. I will never lie here again. Tomorrow I will be in
the Speaker's Tower or I will be dead. He wondered idly whether he had enough riders to
seize the palace by force. Probably not. Which means I am in the hands of Jeiros and the
Night Watchman, and I know that at least one of them despises me.
The realms need a speaker. Principles opened with those words.
One of the palace servants knocked on his door and slipped inside. The girl bowed so low that
her face almost scraped the floor. 'Grand Master Jeiros, Your Holiness.'
So now we shall find out. 'Send him in.'
The girl left. After a few seconds the alchemist came in. Jehal sat up in his bed. 'Have you
come to dress my wound again, Master Jeiros?'
'It is the realms who are wounded, King Jehal. Will you dress that wound? Will you bring us
peace?' 'I will do my best, Grand Master.'
Jeiros bowed his head. 'You should know that We cannot name you speaker until Zafir has
been proven to be dead. 'She was eaten by a dragon, Master Jeiros.'
'Yes, Your Holiness, and there are precedents for this. If Zafir
does not set foot within the Adamantine Palace within the next one
hundred and one days, the Lesser Coucil will recognise that she is
dead. On that day I will summon the kings and queens of the nine realms to name another. I
cannot promise it will be you.'
'Then I have a hundred days to prove I am worthy, do I?'
The alchemist looked up and met his eye. 'Yes, Your Holiness. That would seem to be the
ease. Tomorrow the Lesser Council will name you speaker for a hundred days. I have nothing
to offer you as a sign of your office. No ring, no spear.'
The Adamantine Spear. One day you'll probably try to take it and find that I got there first.
The blood-mage. That's what he'd wanted.
'Zafir did not have the spear with her, Jeiros.' And he never even came for his gold. I wonder
why.
'It is a symbol, Your Holiness. Its powers are a myth.'
'Really?' Let it go. It's really not that important to you.
'We will make another.' The alchemist reached out a hand and offered something to Jehal. A
letter. 'This came for you while you were at war. A dragon from the Pinnacles.'

The writing and the seal were Meteroa's. So he's taken the Pinnacles. Zafir's reign is truly
over. The War of Thorns finally ends.
Jeiros turned to go. 'I have argued with Vale for you. Your feud ends here. I need you both to
understand that.'
Jehal gave him a wry smile. 'Do you give orders to all your speakers?'
'No. Nor do I bring them all back from the brink of death.'
Except you didn't. That was the blood-mage. For reasons that I find ever more troubling. Jehal
sighed. 'The realms need a speaker and I am available. I understand, Master Jeiros. I will try
not to disappoint you.'
'If you do, Vale has a cage waiting for you.' The alchemist smiled weakly. 'I have some faith
in you, King Jehal. I hope you prove me right.'
"Well I'll see what I can do.' Jehal snorted and shook his head. 'I had an ambition to be
speaker once. Being your puppet isn't quite
what I had in mind.' He curled his lip. 'Do one small thing for me, Grand Master. Zafir did not
take your precious spear to war with her. It's been stolen by a blood-mage. His name is
Kithyr. Find him. Bring him back.' He chuckled. 'But don't tell him I sent you. Apparently
he'll kill me.' He sighed and waved Jeiros away. A hundred and one days. Lystra will make
peace with the north for me long before then. And then we shall see. He opened Meteroa's
letter.
The end of Zafir's line as near as I can manage it. The Pinnacles are mine. Kazalain is dead
and so are his sons. Say the word and Princess Kiam can follow them. Not that that'll help.
The trouble with royal families is that everyone is always related to everyone else. No matter
what you do, it's never the end of any bloodline. That's the whole point, isn't it? Not unless
you kill absolutely everyone. Although as I look around at the carnage in the throne room
here, at the two dead princes who were barely more than children, I will concede that
extinguishing us all might be a very fine thing.
Your father once said that only a madman took his wife to war on the eve of giving birth.
Lystra's your wife though, not mine, so perhaps I'm not so mad after all. She is safe and has
celebrated our victory by giving you a son. She asks what his name should be.
Jehal stretched, trying to ease the cricks in his back, chewing on Dreamleaf to numb the pain
in his leg. He read the letter again, and then a third time. When he started for the fourth, it
occurred to him that he wasn't actually reading the words any more and that he had a stupid
grin plastered all over his face.
I am the speaker.
I have a son.
I win.
Again.

48

The Speaker of the Realms
Zafir stood on the ramparts looking out over Fuymuouth. Behind her, parts of Jehal's palace
were burning. She stared out at the sea. There were Taiytakei ships out there. Hundreds of
them. They'd simply appeared in the night, lurking out to sea, asking to be burned. She mulled
the thought over, but whatever she might have wanted, there was little she could do. She'd
gone to Evenspire with two hundred dragons. Now she had exactly one. Sometimes she
wished she'd ignored Tichane. Ignored the blood-mage. Ignored the Night Watchman. Ignored

herself. Sometimes she wished she'd ignored them all and believed that Jehal was hers and
ridden her Onyx to Evenspire and died before she could know she was wrong.
Her fists were clenched so tight they were starting to hurt. With a few deep breaths she forced
herself to relax. She couldn't say she hadn't seen it coming, but it made her want to scream.
A rider appeared at her side. He took her hand and touched it to his lips.
'I am sorry, Your Holiness. Queen Lystra is not here.'
She pulled her hand away. 'Then he took her with him, Prince Tichane. Yes, and now she's at
the Adamantine Palace. She'll be sitting on my throne. My palace. My soldiers. My throne.
My everything. They'll be fucking in my bed, if Jehal can still fuck at all.' She cracked a grim
smile. At least that was one little thing she could savour, when she wasn't grinding her teeth.
'No,' whispered Prince Tichane. 'She went with his uncle. We will trap them both in the
Pinnacles.' He was so close that she could feel his breath on her hair. There was no doubting
what he wanted.
She stepped away, hiding a shiver of revulsion. 'I want him dead. I want her in chains at my
feet. Let them quiver in their beds at night!'
'She will not escape. When my father has finished smashing King Narghon's eyries into little
pieces, the south will be ours. And when he knows you didn't die at Evenspire, the Night
Watchman will fall over himself to put the Viper in chains. It will all be ours in a stroke.' He
moved beside her again and slipped a hand around her waist and across her belly, spreading
his fingers wide, pressing himself against her. This time she leaned into him and purred. He
was no Jehal, but he was every bit as easy to use. And Valmeyan did have a lot of dragons.
'I want that mongrel who's sitting on my throne in the Pinnacles dead. I want the rest of them
hanging in cages where I can watch them die for days. I want a blood-mage so I can keep
them alive for ever and wake up every morning to listen to their pain as I break my fast.
Promise me.'
'I promise. You'll have your palace back and I will make you an empress. There will be no
one to stop us.'
She smiled. 'No one.' Oh, Lystra, Lystra, if there's a cage for anyone ... She put her hand over
his and sighed.

Epilogue

The Great Flame
Rider Semian clenched his fists. 'This isn't how it was supposed to be!' he screamed. 'I was
supposed to serve the Great Flame! I have a destiny! Damn you all!'
He was standing on the top of one the taller peaks of the Worldspine. It would have been easy
to circle even higher on Vengeance's back, but he needed the stillness, the quiet, the calm of
being alone. He'd landed the dragon as close as he could and then he'd climbed, damaged leg
and all, through the snow and the ice, still wrapped in his dragon-scale armour and his riding
furs. He'd almost had to claw his way up at the end. But he had prevailed. He stood on top of
the world, in the still quiet air, in a cold so bitter that it seemed to freeze his words to his lips.
There wasn't even a breath of wind. Despite conquering them, the mountains and the
Worldspine scorned him with their silence. Prince Jehal had broken him. His Red Riders were
destroyed. And that was how it was going to end, in a battle too small to even have a name? 'I
have a destiny!' he screamed again. Unless the Great Flame had chosen a new champion.
Unless he was discarded, old and used up and no good for anything any more. Had he done
what he was sent to do? Had the Red Riders served their purpose?

No. That couldn't be. He'd drunk the dragon-venom. He was chosen.
Standing alone so high gave him clarity. There was no need to be angry. Perhaps the Red
Riders had served their purpose. Perhaps he alone was meant for other things. He didn't know
what his new destiny would be, but did that matter so much? War was coming. Men and
dragons, eyries and castles and cities and palaces, all of them would burn. A whole generation
of men would die. The Great Flame would be served well.
Yes.
Semian started. The word had come into his head, but it wasn't his. He fell to his knees and
almost wept for joy. That was why he'd climbed all the way up here. To hear the voice of the
Great Flame itself.
I remember you.
'Yes. Yes, remember me. And in return, I will serve you.' He looked about in case the red
priest had come to him, but there was nothing but stillness and empty space and mountains.
No. Not you.
The cold suddenly seemed to crash in through the cracks in his armour. 'What have I done?'
He took a deep breath. No, no, there was no need to be afraid. No need at all. That was a
mistake. 'I have a destiny ...'
Do you?
Semian stood up again. He could hear something coming on the wind. And the voice, the
voice in his head. The Great Flame, coming for him. To make him whole.
He turned around as a great white shape soared up the side of the mountain to meet him.
Huge, wings outstretched, filling his sight, with the sun casting a halo of fire around her. He
couldn't speak, but over and over he heard the words of the priest. Out of the sun there shall
come a white dragon.
The dragon soared closer and reached out its neck towards him. And the dragon shall be
Vengeance. And as its jaws opened wide to carry him to his destiny, he thought he heard it
speak in another voice, quite different and quite distinct.
Tittle one, I am hungry.

Acknowledgements
Inspiration comes from all manner of sources. For King oft he Crags, I'd like to thank a group
of people who probably don't get thanked all that often, those who took the time to review
The Adamantine Palace. You have told me what to keep and you have told me what might be
made better. The result hasn't changed all that much from what it would have been without
you, but it has changed a bit — and, I hope, for the better. So here's to you, reviewers and
map lovers. Don't let it go to your heads, mind.
All that said, it is still very true that none of this would have happened without the trust and
faith of the same special few as last time. Thank you again.
I should also acknowledge the various readers who demanded maps with menaces. For those
who want to explore the world of the dragons for its own sake, you can now do so at the
online gazetteer at www.stephendeas.com/gazetteer.
And thank you, readers all. My favourite people.

